Question: The process of hardening a cement matrix through hydration with oral fluids  to achieve greater mechanical strength is known as:
A. Maturation
B. Setting
C. Hardening
D. Mineralization
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Maturation (cement)—The process of hardening a cement matrix through hydration with oral fluids to achieve greater mechanical strength.
Ref: Phillip’s Science of Dental Materials ed 12 pg 309

Question: If solid line represent the rigid height, then the following diagram with excessive inter arch space is classified in?
A. Class - 1
B. Class - 2
C. Class - 3
D. Class - 4
Correct Answer: B

Question: Determination of Pulp vitality by pulse oximeter based on:
A. Beer's law.
B. Pascal's law.
C. Doppler law.
D. Poisslues law.
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Pulse oxymetry-

Based on Beer Lambert law
Utilization of a probe that transmits red (640 mm) and infrared light
Photo detector as a receptor site
Different absorption ability of light by oxygenated and deoxygenated haemoglobin leads to changes in the amount of light differently absorbed by the vascular bed before reaching the photo detector.

Question: A Dentin 'Primer'?
A. Etches the dentin
B. It increases the surface energy & wets the dentin surface
C. Removes the smear layer
D. Conditions the dentin
Correct Answer: B

Question: Relining of complete denture is not indicated when
A. Denture contains broken teeth
B. There is excessive resorption of the ridge
C. Vertical dimension is excessively reduced and has to be changed
D. Centric relation does not coincide with centric occlusion
Correct Answer: C

Question: Secondary retention for a removable partial denture is provided by
A. The indirect retainer
B. The direct retainer
C. Intimate contact between the denture bases and the underlying tissues
D. Direct and indirect retainers
Correct Answer: C

Question: Dimension stability of hydrocollids may be achieved by
A. optimizing w:p
B. using cold water
C. prolonged manipulation
D. using humidor
Correct Answer: D

Question: Two or more parallel vertical surfaces of abutment teeth shaped to direct the prosthesis during placement and removal, are known as:
A. Orientation plane
B. Parallel block out
C. Survey lines
D. Guiding planes
Correct Answer: D

Question: Calcium silicate based material is:
A. MTA
B. Geristore
C. Dieket
D. Retroplast
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Mineral trioxide aggregate was developed by Dr Torabinejad in 1993. 
It contains tricalcium silicate, dicalcium silicate, tricalcium aluminate, bismuth oxide, calcium sulfate and tetracalcium aluminoferrite.
pH of MTA is 12.5.

Textbook of Endodontics Nisha Garg 3rd Ed

Question: The retention of dowel in a pin retained crown is increased by
A. Increased length, smooth surface and increased taper.
B. Increased length, serrated surface and increased taper.
C. Increased length, smooth surface and parallel sides.
D. Increased length, serrated surface and parallel sides.
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Post should be at least 2/3 the root length, parallel sided and serrated for increased retention in the canal

Question: Which of the following is true about calcification of teeth?
A. Calcification of primary teeth is almost complete at time of birth
B. Calcification of all primary teeth and few permanent teeth complete at birth
C. Calcification of all permanent teeth complete at birt
D. Calcification of primary teeth starts around birth
Correct Answer: A

Question: Maximum flow of Type1 inlay wax at 45degree
A. 2%
B. 3%
C. 10%
D. 70%
Correct Answer: D

Question: The main difference between dental stone and dental plaster is:
A. Chemical composition
B. Self life
C. Shape and size of particles
D. Solubility in water
Correct Answer: C

Question: In Steiner's analysis, SNA demonstrates:
A. Position of mandible in relation to cranial base
B. Position of maxilla in relation to cranial base
C. Maxillo-mandibular relationship
D. None of the above
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Relating the Maxilla to the Skull: The angle SNA is formed by joining the lines S-N and N-A . The mean reading for this angle is 82°.
Steiners analysis demonstrates the position of maxilla and mandible in relation to the cranial base. 
If the angular reading is more than 82°, it would indicate a relative forward positioning or protrusion of the maxilla. Conversely, should the reading be less than 82°, it would indicate a relative backward or recessive location of the maxilla.

Question: The use of kinematic face bow is contraindicated in the
edentulous patients because
A. It has to be used on the mandibular ridge
B. Recording base may be unstable on the edentulous mandible
C. Movement of bases may lead to inaccuracy in recording hinge axis
D. All of the above
Correct Answer: D

Question: Granules of Eleidin are present in which of the following layer?
A. Stratum corneum
B. Stratum lucidum
C. Stratum spinosum
D. Stratum basale
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Stratum Lucidum - Also called clear cell layer. Present only in skin of palms and soles. Translucent due to presence of refractile Eleidin granules

Question: Which of the following is a feature of papillon lefevre
syndrome?
A. destructive periodontitis
B. palmar-plantar keratosis
C. calcification of dura
D. all the above
Correct Answer: D

Question: Pyogenic granuloma is associated with
A. Gastric adenocarcinoma
B. Pseudomonas infection
C. Ulcerative colitis
D. Intestinal tuberculosis
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Pyogenic granuloma is a misnomer as there is no granuloma. It is a benign vascular lesion that bleeds easily on trauma.
It is associated with Inflammatory Bowel disease (Ulcerative colitis > Crohn's disease).

Question: Epithelial rests of Malassez are found in
A. Pulp
B. Gingiva
C. Periodontal Ligament
D. Alveolar mucosa
Correct Answer: C

Question: A 7 year old male patient presents to the clinic for routine dental examination and has history of frequent snacking and sugary beverages. Intraoral examination shows multiple pit and fissure caries and subsurface enamel porosity manifesting as milky white opacity. Tactile probing should not be used in this case because of all of the following EXCEPT?
A. Insertion  of  the  explorer  into  the  suspected lesion inevitably disrupts the surface layer covering very early lesions, thereby eliminating the possibility for remineralization of the decalcified area
B. Probing of lesions and suspected lesions results in the transport of  cariogenic  bacteria  from  one area  to another
C. Frank lesions requiring restoration are generally apparent visually  without  the  need  for  probing.
D. It may induce spontaneous bleeding
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Traditionally, dentists have relied upon a visual-tactile radiographic  procedure  for  the detection  of  dental caries. This procedure involves the visual identification of demineralized  areas  (typically  white  spots)  or  suspicious pits or fissures and the use of the dental explorer to determine the  presence of a  loss of continuity  or breaks in the enamel and to assess the softness or resilience of the enamel. Caries lesions located on interproximal tooth surfaces  have  generally  been  detected  with  the  use  of  bitewing radiographs. These procedures have been used routinely in virtually every dental office in the United States for the past 50 years. Tactile probing with an explorer is no longer used for caries detection in most European countries, and this protocol has now been adopted by many U.S. dental schools. The primary concerns that led to the discontinuation of the probing procedure were as follows:
1. The  insertion  of  the  explorer  into  the  suspected lesion inevitably disrupts the surface layer covering very early lesions, thereby eliminating the possibility for remineralization of the decalcified area; 
2. The probing of lesions and suspected lesions results in the transport of  cariogenic  bacteria  from  one area  to another;  and  
3. Frank lesions requiring restoration are generally apparent visually  without  the  need  for  probing.

Question: The mesial surface of the crown is almost parallel to long axis and the root of a:
A. Maxillary 1st premolar
B. Mandibular 2nd Premolar
C. Maxillary canine
D. Mandibular canine
Correct Answer: D

Question: Which of the following is not a structural element of TMJ?
A. Sigmoid notch
B. Articular disc
C. Capsular ligament
D. Joint cavities
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Sigmoid notch (or) mandibular notch forms the sharp upper border of the ramus the condyle and coronoid process.

Question: Pseudo pocket is seen in the
A. Base of the pocket lies on cementum
B. Gingivitis
C. Periodontitis
D. Base of the pocket and lies on alveolar bone
Correct Answer: B

Question: Thickness of oxygen inhibition layer in composite curing is:
A. 1-50 micrometer
B. 15-150 micrometer
C. 50-500 micrometer
D. 1000-2000 micrometer
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: When composite is light cured, oxygen in the air causes an interference in the polymerization resulting in the formation of an oxygen inhibition layer on the surface of the composite.The oxygen-inhibited layer is the sticky, resin-rich uncured layer that is left on the surface.Thickness is about 50-500 micrometer.
Reference- Sturdevant 6th ed P:237

Question: How much luting agent is required for cementation of crown?
A. 3/4th filled slightly upto the margin
B. 1/4th filled
C. 1/2 filled
D. Full to prevent bubble
Correct Answer: C

Question: "Birbeck granules" are seen in
A. Melanosomes
B. Lamellar bodies
C. Keratohyalin granules
D. Langerhan cells
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: "Tennis racket" shaped Birbeck granules are seen in Langerhan cells, which are antigen presenting cells present in epidermis.

Question: The number of line angles in a permanent maxillary central incisor is
A. Two
B. Four
C. Six
D. Eight
Correct Answer: C

Question: Following are adverse effects of Clofazimine except
A. Skin staining
B. Icthyosis
C. Diarrhoea
D. Gastritis
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Clofazimine is a brick red, fat-soluble crystalline dye. It has weakly bactericidal action against M. leprae It has an anti-inflammatory effect, which is useful in the management of ENL reactions. High drug concentrations are found in the intestinal mucosa, mesenteric lymph nodes and body fat. The most noticeable side effect is skin discoloration, ranging from red to purple-black The degree of discoloration depending on the dose and amount of leprous infiltration. Urine, sputum and sweat may become pink. Clofazimine also produces a characteristic ichthyosis on the shins and forearms. Gastrointestinal side effects, ranging from mild cramps to diarrhoea and weight loss, may occur as a result of clofazimine crystal deposition in the wall of the small bowel.

Question: A 12-year-old boy reported with a class II and div 1 malocclusion with proclined upper incisor and deep bite. Intraoral examination revealed a bilaterally symmetrical face, convex profile, potentially competent Lips with normal incisor display during rest and smile. Cephalometric finding showed that the patient had a horizontal growth direction with CVMI stage III, increased overjet and normal lower incisor inclination

What would be the appliance of choice for this patient
A. Twin block
B. Activator
C. Bioator
D. Supermarionator
Correct Answer: A

Question: True about the statement is: When null hypothesis is rejected when it is true?
A. Type I alpha error
B. Type II beta error
C. Gamma error
D. All of the above
Correct Answer: A

Question: Gingival sulcus is V shaped and it barely permits the entrance of a
A. Periodontal hoe
B. Periodontal curette
C. Periodontal probe
D. Periodontal sickle
Correct Answer: C

Question: Predominant bacteria found in two days old plaque
A. Streptococci
B. Bacteroides
C. Spirocheates
D. Actinomyces
Correct Answer: A

Question: The number 12 in a 3 unit formula 12-6-8 indicates the blade is
A. 12 mm in length
B. 1.2 mm in length
C. 12 mm in width
D. 1.2 mm in width
Correct Answer: D

Question: Drugs known to cause Steven Johnson syndrome include the following except:
A. Cephalosporins
B. Ibuprofen
C. Carbamazepine
D. Paracetamol
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Drugs that most commonly cause SJS/TEN Antibiotics Antifungals Antivirals Sulfonamides, e.g., cotrimoxizole; beta-lactams i.e. penicillins, cephalosporins Imidazole antifungals Nevirapine (non-nucleoside reverse-transcriptase inhibitor) Allopurinol Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAID) (oxicam type mainly) Naproxen Ibuprofen Anti-convulsants Carbamazepine Phenytoin Phenobarbital Valproic acid Lamotrigine

Question: The advantage of using a tooth positioner as a retainer is :
A. Final setting of occlusion
B. Used in uncooperative patients
C. Esthetics
D. Gingival margin inflamed during orthodontic treatment
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: The use of a tooth positioner rather than final settling archwires has two advantages: 

It allows the fixed appliance to be removed somewhat more quickly than otherwise would have been the case (i.e., some finishing that could have been done with the final archwires can be left to the positioner)
It serves not only to reposition the teeth but also to massage the gingiva, which is almost always at least slightly inflamed and swollen after comprehensive orthodontic treatment. The gingival stimulation provided by a positioner is an excellent way to promote a rapid return to normal gingival contours.

As a general rule, a tooth positioner in a cooperative patient will produce any changes it is capable of within 2-3 weeks. Final (post-treatment) records and retainer impressions can be taken 2 or 3 weeks after the positioner is placed. Beyond that time, if the positioner is continued, it is serving as a retainer rather than a finishing device-and positioners, as a rule, are not good retainers.
Contemporary orthodontics- proffit 4th edition page 614

Question: In a UK study, it was found that there were more deaths from asthma than the sale of anti-asthma drugs. This is an example of:
A. Cohort study.
B. Case reference study.
C. Ecological study.
D. Experimental study.
Correct Answer: C

Question: Lamina densa of the basal lamina beneath the epithelium is composed of
A. Type I Collagen
B. Type II Collagen
C. Type III Collagen
D. Type IV Collagen
Correct Answer: D

Question: A child has mid-crown fracture in a permanent
maxillary central incisor several months ago, the pulp is now necrotic, radiographic examination reveals an incompletely formed root with an open apex. The treatment of choice is:
A. Formocresol pulpotomy
B. Root canal therapy
C. Calcium hydroxide pulpotomy
D. Apexification
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Apexification is the process of inducing the development of the root and the apical closure in an immature pulpless tooth with an open apex.
The main aim of apexification is to preserve the Hertwig’s root sheath and apical pulp tissue.

Ref: Textbook of endodontics, Nisha Garg and Amit Garg, 3rd edition, pg no:548

Question: Collagen biosynthesis occurs inside the:
A. Chondroblasts
B. Odontoblasts
C. Osteoblasts
D. Fibroblasts
Correct Answer: D

Question: The principal characteristics of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder are all of the following except one. Which one is the exception?
A. Inattention
B. Mental retardation
C. Hyperactivity
D. Impulsivity
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Inattention and hyperactivity/impulsivity are the key behaviors of ADHD. Some people with ADHD only have problems with one of the behaviors, while others have both inattention and hyperactivity-impulsivity. Most children have the combined type of ADHD.
In preschool, the most common ADHD symptom is hyperactivity.
It is normal to have some inattention, unfocused motor activity, and impulsivity, but for people with ADHD, these behaviors:

Are more severe
Occur more often
Interfere with or reduce the quality of how they function socially, at school, or in a job.

Question: Hand over mouth technique was first described by:
A. Dr. Evangeline Jordan
B. Addeston and Gold fried
C. Dr.G.V.Black
D. Dr. Goldman
Correct Answer: A

Question: As compared to permanent tooth, root formation in primary tooth:
A. Take less time
B. Take more time
C. Same time
D. Is complete when tooth erupts in oral cavity
Correct Answer: A

Question: A 27 year old sexually active male develops a vesiculobullous lesion on the glans soon after within 8hrs taking tablet diclofenac for viral fever. The lesion healed with hyperpigmentation.The most likely dignosis is-
A. Behcet's syndrome
B. herpes genitalis
C. fixed drug erruption
D. pemphigus vulgaris
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Fixed drug eruption It characteristically recur at the same site following administration of offending drugs or occasionally a member of the same group of drugs. They occur 30min to 8hrs after drug administration Most common drugs: Sulfonamides NSAIDS Dapsone Batbiturates Ciprofloxacin Phenytoin Griseofulvin Metronidazole Antituberculous drugs Pathomechanism Drug induced CD8 positive Tcells induce INFs and TNFalpha dependent damage to keratinocytes Clinical features Single / multiple, round / oval lesions Well demarcated erythematous edematous plaques that resolve with violaceous /hyperpigmented macules Associated burning/ stinging and pruritus Most common sites: oral mucosa; glans penis; hands and feet Bulbous fed: generalised well defines erythematous and bulbous lesions bilateral and symmetrical. Pseudoephedrine causes nonpigmented FDE lesion heal without pigmentation Investigations: oral or topical provocation test. Test drug is taken orally or applied topically Treatment Discontinue the offending drug Coicosteroids: topical and systemic Antihistamines. IADVL textbook of dermatology page 1664

Question: Growth of oral structures is mainly influenced by factors:
A. Hereditary
B. Environmental
C. Hereditary-influenced by environmental factor
D. None of the above
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Van Limborgh after review of the sutural theory, cartilaginous theory and functional matrix theory has summarized the following features:
1. Intrinsic genetic factor controls chondrocranial growth.
2. Epigenetic factors originating from skull cartilages and head tissues control desmocranial growth.
3. Local environmental factors, like tension forces and pressure, influence the growth of desmocranial growth.
4. General epigenetic and general environmental factors are less significant in craniofacial growth.
Key Concept:
Growth of oral structures is mainly inﬂuenced by factors Hereditary-inﬂuenced by environmental factors.

Question: Apical transportation is also known as
A. Curing
B. Zipping
C. Ledging
D. Apical perforation
Correct Answer: B

Question: An expansion alliance made with an expansion screw is an example of:
A. Simple anchorage
B. Reciprocal anchorage
C. Multiple anchorage
D. Reinforced anchorage
Correct Answer: B

Question: Which of the following fuel gases used for soldering, has the highest heat content
A. Hydrogen
B. Natural gas
C. Acetylene
D. Propane
Correct Answer: D

Question: In measuring Vickers hardness no. which of the following is used:
A. Spherical indenter
B. Steel ball indentation
C. Rhomboid shaped indenter
D. 136-degree diamond pyramid
Correct Answer: D

Question: 25 years old female has palatal ulcer and skin blister most likely diagnosis is –
A. Pemphigus vulgaris
B. Pemphigus foliaceous
C. Dermatitis herpetiformis
D. Pemphigoid
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Skin blister
Oral mucosa involvement (palatal ulcer)

Question: Of the following permanent teeth, which is least likely to have two roots?
A. Maxillary canine
B. Mandibular canine
C. Maxillary first premolar
D. Mandibular first premolar
Correct Answer: A

Question: Once the enamel formation is complete, the tooth will erupt after approximately:
A. One year
B. Two years
C. Three years
D. Four years
Correct Answer: C

Question: Cells occurring in greatest number in pulp are
A. Cementoblasts
B. Fibroblasts
C. Osteoblasts
D. Ameloblasts
Correct Answer: B

Question: A 3-year-old male has come for a routine dental check up. Intra-oral examination reveals good oral hygiene and open proximal contacts. During previous dental appointments, he was cooperative. Which radiographic assessment should be done for this patient?
A. No radiographic assessment.
B. Bitewing Radiographs
C. Intraoral periapical radiograph
D. Occlusal radiographs
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: The American Dental Association (ADA), the American Academy for Pediatric Dentistry (AAPD), the European Academy for Pediatric Dentistry (EAPD), and other organizations have published criteria that are meant to guide the dental professional in decision-making regarding appropriate radiographic imaging (Table 2-5). These guidelines clearly state that if the patient cannot cope with the procedure, one should attempt other strategies to handle the situation. The guidelines all acknowledge that, in some cases, radiographs are not possible, in which case, one should balance the benefit against the risk even more carefully. Sometimes it is better to postpone the radiographic exposure until the patient is older or better conditioned. The guidelines also clearly state that if there are no clinical signs of pathology, the need for a radiographic assessment is up to the professional’s judgment, and that these decisions have to be made on an individual patient basis. Radiographs are never to be used for economic and screening reasons since they involve a potential health risk for the patient. A 3-year-old with a sound dentition and open proximal contacts does not need a radiographic assessment. In contrast, for a 3-year-old with only 10 teeth visible in the mouth and no history of dental treatment, the dental professional should make a radiographic assessment. If a 4-year-old shows rampant decay, a radiographic assessment is certainly justifiable and indicated.

Question: The cuspal inclines of the maxillary buccal cusps and the mandibular lingual cusps should be grounded if they are in deflective occlusal contact in:
A. Working position only
B. Balancing position only
C. Both working and balancing positions
D. Central position
Correct Answer: A

Question: Web of causation of disease, which statement is most appropriate?
A. Mostly applicable for common diseases
B. Requires complete understanding of all factors associated with causation of disease
C. Epidemiological ratio
D. Helps to suggest ways to interrupt the risk of transmission
Correct Answer: D

Question: An eleven year old boy is having tinea capitis on his scalp. The most appropriate line of treatment is –
A. Oral griseofulvin therapy
B. Topical griseofulvin therapy
C. Shaving of the scalp
D. Selenium sulphide shampoo
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Systemic therapy for all dermatophytosis

Terbinafm  → DOC
Griseofulvin → 2nd choice

Once the mainstay of systemic therapy for dermatophytic infection, has now replaced by terbinafine.

Question: Normal turnover rate of epidermis:
A. 2 weeks
B. 4 weeks
C. 6 weeks
D. 8 weeks
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Epidermal turnover time - skin doubling time -Time taken by keratinocytes to move from Stratum Basale to environment. -Around 14 days are required to move from Stratum Basale to reach lowermost layer of Stratum Corneum & 14 days to cross Stratum Corneum. -Sloughing off requires 28 days So total ETT =56 days (8 weeks) The turnover time in psoriasis = 4 days.

Question: The strength attained by amalgam within 8 hours is
A. 60%
B. 70%
C. 80%
D. 90%
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: The strength attained by amalgam within 8 hours is 70%.
Reference: Phillip’s Science of Dental Materials, Pg-353

Question: Powders of dental plaster and dental stone differ
mainly in:
A. Solubility
B. Shelf life
C. Chemical formula
D. Particle porosity
Correct Answer: D

Question: Drug that may induce nail pigmentation - melanonychia:
A. Retinoids
B. Carbamazepine
C. Tetracyclines
D. Zidovudine
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Anthracyclines, taxanes, fluorouracil, psoralens, and zidovudine may induce nail pigmentation through melanocyte stimulation in nail matrix resulting in melanonychia. It appears to be reversible and dose-dependent and appears 3-8 weeks after drug intake.

Question: Most root canals that have not been instrumented are too narrow to be reached effectively by
A. Microbes
B. Disinfectants
C. Gutta percha
D. None of the above
Correct Answer: B

Question: If the maxillary right second molar is treated successfully the distal furcation involvement can best be kept plaque free by using:
A. Dental Floss
B. Perio aid
C. Stimudent
D. Rubber tip stimulator
Correct Answer: B

Question: The common etiology of periodontitis is
A. Occlusal trauma
B. Systemic factors
C. Local irritating factors
D. Hormonal defects
Correct Answer: C

Question: The most common mechanical failure for metal-ceramic restorations is
A. Debonding of the porcelain from the metal.
B. Shrinkage of the porcelain at mouth temperature.
C. Debonding of the PFM from the tooth.
D. None of the above
Correct Answer: A

Question: A two way process of exchanging or shaping ideas,
feeling and information is called as
A. Education
B. Communication
C. Interview
D. Suggestion
Correct Answer: B

Question: Lactic acid is produced in mouth by
A. Saccharolytic bacteria in supragingival region
B. Saccharolytic bacteria in subgingival region
C. Non-saccharolytic bacteria in supragingival region
D. Non-saccharolytic bacteria in subgingival region
Correct Answer: A

Question: Which of the following tooth can show any of the eight types of Vertucci’s classiﬁcation?
A. Lower 1st premolar
B. Upper 1st premolar
C. Lower 2nd premolar
D. Upper 2nd premolar
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Maxillary 2nd premolar can show any of the eight types of Vertucci's classiﬁcation.

Question: Healing of a wound which simply restores the continuity of the diseased marginal gingiva is known as
A. Regeneration
B. new attachment
C. Repair
D. reattachment
Correct Answer: C

Question: A dental floss is applied to the distal bow of a clamp, its function is:
A. To facilitate the removal of the clamp
B. To prevent aspiration of clamp
C. To anchor the dam as cervically as possible
D. To stabilize the clamp
Correct Answer: B

Question: Which of the following is a disadvantage of topically applied sodium fluoride solution?
A. Need to prepare a fresh solution for each patient
B. Taste is not well accepted by patients
C. Patient must make four visits to the dentist within a relatively short period of time
D. The solution should be allowed to dry for 5 minutes
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Advantages of neutral sodium fluoride solution-
1. It is relatively stable when kept in a plastic container and there is no need to prepare a fresh solution for each patient. 
2. The taste is well accepted by patients. 
3. The  solution  is non-irritating  to the gingiva. 
4. It does not cause discoloration of tooth structure. 
5. Once applied to the teeth, the solution is allowed to dry for 3 minutes. Thus the clinician in public health programs can pursue a multiple-chair procedure. 
6. The series of treatments must be repeated only four times in the general age range of 3  to  13, rather than  at annual or semiannual intervals, therefore in a public health program, other groups of children can be treated in theJintervening years. 
Disadvantage of neutral sodium fluoride solution-
1. The major disadvantage of the use of sodium fluoride is that the patient must make four visits to the dentist within a relatively short period of time.

Question: A 24 yr-old female has flaccid bullae over the skin and oral erosions. Histopathology shows intraepidermal blister with acantholytic cells. Diagnosis is:
A. Pemphigoid
B. Erythema multiforme
C. Pemphigus vulgaris
D. Dermatitis herpetiformis
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: The features of intaepidermal acantholytic blisters coupled with flacid bullae over skin and oral erosions points towards P. vulgaris. The other 3 diseases do now show intraepidermal blistering. They are devoid of mucosal involement. Erythema Multiforme: Target lesion seen on distal extremeties. If mucosa involved it is called as Epidermal Multiforme Major Dermatitis herpetiformis: Extremely pruritic vesicopapules over extensors Pemphigoid: Tense bullae

Question: Which of the following impart structural durability in a three quarter crown  preparation on a mandibular molar?
A. Occlusal shoulder
B. Functional cusp bevel
C. Proximal groove
D. All of the above
Correct Answer: D

Question: The advantage of unfilled methyl methacrylate is that:
A. It can be finished smoothly
B. It has a low degree of flow
C. It's non-irritation to pulp
D. It's wear resistant is high
Correct Answer: A

Question: In children below 5 years of age, most common cause of gingivitis is
A. local irritating factors
B. herpes
C. vitamin deficiency
D. malocclusion
Correct Answer: A

Question: Palpable purpura is seen in –
A. PAN
B. ITP
C. TTP
D. DIC
Correct Answer: A

Question: The number of times an individual swallows per day while awake:
A. 600
B. 800
C. 700
D. 900
Correct Answer: A

Question: At the CEJ, which of the following occurs
A. Cementum meets enamel
B. Cementum overlaps enamel
C. Cementum does not meet enamel
D. All of the above
Correct Answer: D

Question: The primary reason for replacing teeth destroyed due to
nursing bottle syndrome is
A. Speech and esthetics
B. Form and function
C. Incising and mastication
D. Arch perimeter requirements in the transitional dentition
Correct Answer: A

Question: The coronoid process:
A. Limits the extension of maxillary posterior teeth setting
B. Limits the thickness of the distobuccal flange of the upper complete denture
C. Limits the thickness of the distobuccal flange of the lower complete denture
D. Determines PPS
Correct Answer: B

Question: Pinch purpura is diagnostic of –
A. Systemic primary amyloidosis
B. Secondary systemic amyloidosis
C. Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura
D. Drug induced purpura
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: In primary systemic amyloidosis amyloid deposition occurs in the wall of the blood vessels, this leads to an increase in skin fragility. As a result, petechiae and purpura develop in clinically normal skin as well as in lesional skin following minor trauma. Therefore the skin lesions in case of primary systemic amyloidosis are called pinch purpura. These lesions are pink in colour and translucent.
Common locations are


Face (especially the periorbital and perioral regions)
Flexural areas.

Question: What is the amount of time required by erupting premolar to move through 1 mm of bone as measured on a bite-wing radiograph?
A. 3-4 months
B. 4-5 months
C. 5-6 months
D. 6-7 months
Correct Answer: B

Question: Commonest fungal infection of female genitalia in diabetes?
A. Cryptococcal
B. Madurmycosis
C. Candida
D. Aspergillosis
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Candida is the commonest infection of female genital tract in diabetes. Candida species are normal commensals of the mouth, GI tract, vaginal mucosa and in the patients with an indwelling catheter. Diabetes is paicularly associated with increased susceptibility to vaginal infections.

Question: Apical root fracture in an anterior tooth is treated by:
A. Extraction
B. Splinting for 2-3 months
C. Endodontic treatment
D. All of the above
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: A tooth with its root fractured in its apical third has an excellent prognosis because the pulp in the apical fragment usually remains vital, and the tooth may remain firm in its socket. 
A mobile tooth should be splinted. 
If the pulp in the coronal fragment remains vital and the tooth is stable, with or without ligation, then no additional treatment is indicated.
In the event of pulpal death in the coronal fragment, endodontic treatment can be done, which is preferably limited to the coronal fragment. 
If the tooth fails to recover, the apical root fragment can be removed surgically.


Ref : Grossman’s endodontics,13th edition, pg no:430

Question: An eight year old child has active white spot lesions on his teeth and  gives a history of having sugar containing snacks and beverages more than 3 times in between meals. In which category can we classify this child
A. High Risk
B. Moderate Risk
C. Low Risk
D. None
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Caries-Risk Assessment Form for Children 6 Years Old or Younger

Question: Which of the following generations of amalgam exhibit highest nobility?
A. 3rd generation amalgam
B. 4th generation amalgam
C. 5th generation amalgam
D. 6th generation amalgam
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: The set amalgam exhibits the highest nobility of any previous amalgam and has been the most recent 6th generation of amalgam to be developed.
Reference: Marzouk Operative dentistry, pg-106

Question: Rough and Irregular surface produced on the impression is because of?
A. Improper application of pressure during impression making
B. Air incorporated during mixing
C. Too rapid polymerization
D. Presence of moisture in impression area
Correct Answer: C

Question: The impression with the least dimensional change upon disinfection is
A. Addition poly silicone
B. Agar-agar
C. Polysulphide
D. Polyether
Correct Answer: A

Question: Admixed high copper alloy powder contains
A. 9-20% copper
B. 13-20% copper
C. 9-30% copper
D. 13-30% copper
Correct Answer: A

Question: WHO global programme for oral health targets for 2000 irtclude;
A. <2 DMFT at 12 years
B. <3 DMFT at 12 years
C. <4 DMFT at 12 years
D. <5 DMFT at 12 years
Correct Answer: B

Question: Dentogingival unit comprises of
A. Gingival fibres
B. Gingival fibres and junctional epithelium
C. P.D. fibres and ligament
D. None of the above
Correct Answer: B

Question: When pulp cannot be extirpated in narrow canals, which of the following can be used
A. Obtundant
B. Astringent
C. Haemostatic
D. Mummifying agent
Correct Answer: D

Question: The maxillary teeth which have single antagonist are:
A. Lateral incisors
B. Permanent canines
C. Permanent central incisors
D. Third molars
Correct Answer: D

Question: Which of the following is associated with the disease pathology seen in this child?
A. Leg length discrepancy
B. Airway involvement
C. Glaucoma
D. Growth hormone deficiency
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Child with right sided po-wine stain- seen in sturge weber syndrome. Features of sturge weber syndrome: S- Seizure T- Trigeminal distribution of po wine stain U- Unilateral weakness R- Retardation( mental retardation) G-Glaucoma E- Buphthalamos here, glaucoma is associated with surface ocular vascular malformations .

Question: Self etching primers
A. Simultaneously etch and prime dentin and enamel
B. Etches enamel only
C. Only bonds to enamel
D. Only removes smear layer
Correct Answer: A

Question: Periodontal pack is least successful in the management of?
A. Splinting
B. Antimicrobial Properties
C. Hemostasis
D. Pain elimination
Correct Answer: D

Question: Pitting of nails is seen in – a) Lichen planusb) Psoriasisc) Pemphigusd) Arsenic poisoning
A. ab
B. a
C. ad
D. bc
Correct Answer: A

Question: Mode Is:
A. Arthimetic average of the values
B. Most frequently occurring observations
C. Middle observation when arranged in ascending or descending order
D. Adding all values and then dividing by number of values
Correct Answer: B

Question: Chlorhexidine as a root canal irrigant is
A. Active against gram +ve , gram –ve bacterias and to some extent Virus with lipid envelop.
B. Normally used at 2% conc
C. A poly biguinide
D. All of the above
Correct Answer: D

Question: A 6 year old female patient complains of pain due to a decayed lower right 2nd molar. During the treatment, patient becomes uncooperative and throws a tantrum. The dentist then asks the mother to step out of the operatory, after which the child begins to cooperate. The example demonstrated by the dentist falls under which type of conditioning, as described by Skinner?
A. Positive reinforcement
B. Negative reinforcement
C. Omission
D. Punishment
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Omission (also called time-out), involves removal of a pleasant stimulus after a particular response. For example, if a child who throws a temper tantrum has his favorite toy taken away for a short time as a consequence of this behavior, the probability of similar misbehavior is decreased.

Question: The term applied when it is doubtful whether there will be space for all the teeth in mixed dentition analysis is:
A. Space maintenance
B. Space regaining
C. Space supervision
D. None of the above
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Space supervision 

It is a term applied when it is doubtful, according to the mixed dentition analysis, whether there will be room for all the teeth.
Prognosis for supervision is always questionable, where as prognosis is always good for regaining space and for space maintenance.
Space supervision cases are those that will have a better chance of getting through the mixed dentition with clinical guidance than they will without.

Handbook of orthodontics  Moyers 4th Ed P-364

