Question: Position of vocal cord in cadaver is:
A. Median
B. Paramedian
C. Intermediate
D. Full Abduction
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: The vocal fold of the excised larynx is known to be located at an intermediate position(the so-called cadaver position).

Question: Treatment of choice in traumatic facial nerve injury is:
A. Facial sling
B. Facial nerve repair
C. Conservative management
D. Systemic corticosteroids
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: (b) Facial nerve repair(Ref. Scott Brown, 6th ed., 1404)Since generally following trauma the facial nerve injury occurs as sudden onset. Facial decompression should be the best option.

Question: In caloric test, cold water stimulation causes movement of eye -
A. Some side
B. Opposite side
C. Up
D. Do\vn
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. is 'b' i.e., Opposite side [Ref: Dhingra 5th/e p. 48}o Each ear is irrigated twice : once with cold water (70C below the body temperature, i. e. 300C) and then with warm water (70C above the body temperature, i.e. 440C).o Cold water provokes nystagmus towards the opposite ear, while warm water provokes nystagmus towardssame ear (COWS Cold - oppsite, Warm - same).

Question: Tonsillar fossa is bounded anteriorly by
A. Pharyngobasilar fascia
B. Palatopharyngeal fold
C. Buccopharyngeal fascia
D. Palatoglossal fold
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Tonsilar fossa is bounded by Anterior - Palatoglossal fold containing palatoglossal muscle Posterior - Palatopharyngeal fold containing palato pharyngeal muscle Apex - Soft palate, where both arches meet Base - Dorsal surface of posterior one-third of tongue. (Ref: Anatomy of head, neck and brain. Vishram Singh. P 227 )

Question: All are major symptoms of sinusitis except
A. Nasal blockage
B. Facial congestion
C. Nasal congestion
D. Halitosis
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: According to Rhinosinusitis task force definition of sinusitis,Major criteria-Facial pain, pressure, congestion, nasal obstruction, nasal/postnasal discharge, hyposmia and feverMinor criteria- Headache, halitosis, and dental painRef: Hazarika; 3rd ed; Pg 328

Question: A tracheostomised patient, with poex tracheostomy tube, in the ward, developed sudden complete blockage of the tube. Which of the following is best next step in the management?
A. Immediate removal of the tracheostomy tube
B. Suction of tube with sodium bicarbonate
C. Suction of tube with saline
D. Jet ventilation
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Immediate removal of the tracheostomy tube is best next step in the management in the above case -Suction of tube with sodium bicarbonate is done to avoid the blockage. -Suction of the tube with saline can't be used when there's a complete obstruction. - Jet ventilation is done below the level of larynx, when we're operating on the larynx.

Question: Vocal cord palsy is not associated with -
A. Vertebral secondaries
B. Left atrial enlargement
C. Bronchogenic carcinoma
D. secondaries in mediastinum
Correct Answer: A

Question: Most common pa of larynx involved in TB ?
A. Anterior
B. Posterior
C. Middle
D. Anywhere
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. is 'b' i.e., Posterior Essential otolaryngology 2"d/e p. 1139] Disease affects the posterior third of larynx more commonly than anterior pa. The pas affected in descending order of frequency are :- i) Interarytenoid fold, ii) Ventricular band, iii) Vocal cords, iv) Epiglottis.

Question: Heamorrhagic external otitis media is caused by
A. Influenza
B. Proteus
C. Streptococcus
D. Staphylococcus
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Otitis externa haemorrhagica It is characterized by for mation of haemorrhagic bullae on the tympanic membrane and deep meatus. It is probably viral in origin and may be seen in influenza epidemics. The condition causes severe pain in the ear and blood-stained discharge when the bullae rupture. Treatment: with analgesics is directed to give relief from pain. Antibiotics are given for secondary infection of the ear canal, or middle ear if the bulla has ruptured into the middle ear. Ref:- Dhingra; pg num:-52

Question: All are subjective tests for audiometry except:
A. Tone decay
B. Impedance audiometry
C. Speech audiometry
D. Pure tone audiometry
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: (b) Impedance audiometry(Ref. Scott Brown, 6th ed., Vol 2; 2/12/1)Impedance audiometry is an objective test. It does not require the cooperation of patient.Other objective audiometry tests are; OAEs, Electrocochleography and BERA

Question: All are true statement about tracheostomy and larynx in children except:
A. Omega shaped epiglottis
B. Laryngeal cailages are soft and collapsable
C. Larynx is high in children
D. Trachea can be easily palpated
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Infant's larynx differs from adult in:It is situated high up (C2 - C4).Q (in adults = C3 - C6)Of equal size in both sixes (in adults it is larger in males)Larynx is funnel shapedThe narrowest pa of the infantile larynx is the junction of subglottic larynx with trachea and this is because cricoid cailage is very smallEpiglottis is omega shaped, soft, large and patulous.Laryngeal cailages are soft and collapse easilySho trachea and sho neck.Vocal cords are angled and lie at level of C4Trachea bifurcates at level of T2Thyroid cailage is flat. The cricothyroid and thyrohyoid spaces are narrow.Tracheostomy in Infants and Children Trachea of infants and children is soft and compressible and its identification may become difficult and the surgeon may easily displace it and go deep or lateral to it injuring recurrent laryngeal nerve or even the carotid.During positioning, do not extend too much as this pulls structures from chest into the neck and thus injury may occur to pleura, innominate vessels and thymus or the tracheostomy opening may be made twoo low near suprasternal notchTracheostomy in Infants and Children The incision is a sho transverse one, midway between lower border of thyroid cailage and the suprasternal notch. The neck must be well extended.A incision is made through two tracheal rings, preferably the third or fouh.

Question: Stapes develops from:
A. 1st arch
B. 2nd arch
C. 3rd arch
D. 4th arch
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Malleus and incus are derived from mesoderm of 1" arch. Stapes develops from second arch except its footplate and annular ligament which are derived from the otic capsule.

Question: Tripod fracture is the name given for -
A. Zygomatic fracture
B. Maxillary fracture
C. Mandibularfracture
D. Temporal fracture
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. is 'a1 i.e., Zygomatic fracture o Zygoma fracture is also known as tripoid fracture.Clinical features of zygoma fractureo Considerable swelling over zygomatic arch is common and makes clinical diagnosis more difficult.o Flattening of malar prominence.o Step-deformit of infraorbital margin.o Anaesthesia in the distribution of infraorbital nerve.o Trimus, due to depression of zygoma on the underlying coronoid process.o Oblique palpebral fissure, due to the displacement of lateral palpebral ligament.o Restricted ocular movement, due to entrapment of inferior rectus muscle. It may cause diplopia.o Periorbital emphysema, due to escape of air from the maxillary sinus on nose-blowing.o The mucosa of the maxillary sinus may be lacerated and cause epistaxis on that side.o Fracture of the zygoma may or may not be painful to palpation and running a finger along the zygomatic arch may give a feel of a depressedfracture or a small dimple. The cheek may appear flattened; compared symmetry with the opposite side. This may be obvious immediately following trauma or several days later once swelling has subsided.

Question: Most definitive diagnosis of sinusitis is by
A. X- ray PNS
B. Proof puncture
C. Sinuscopy
D. Transillumination test
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Sinuscopy is a method of Endoscopic sinus observation or surgery using Nose telescope. It involves the evaluation of nasal and sinus passages using the endoscope called Sinuscope. The Sinuscope has a narrow tube with a built-in camera so that the physician can see the internal details of the sinuses. By observing the sinus, it is possible to diagnose the problems and treat properly.

Question: When the patient fails to understand normal speech but can understand shouted or amplified speech the hearing loss is termed as
A. Mild hearing loss
B. Moderate hearing loss
C. Severe hearing loss
D. Profound hearing loss
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: DEGREES OF HEARING LOSS 0-25dB-Not significant impairment- no significant difficulty with faint speech 26-40dB-Mild impairment-Difficult with faint speech 41-55dB-Moderate impairment -Frequently difficult with normal speech 56-70dB-Moderately severe impairment-Frequently difficult with loud sound 71-91dB-Severe impairment-Can understand only shouted or amplified sound Above 91-Profound impairment-Usually cannot understand even amplified sound Ref: Diseases of EAR, NOSE AND THROAT by PL DHINGRA - 6th Edition. Page no. 39

Question: Most common cause of facial nerve palsy:
A. Idiopathic Bell's palsy
B. Herpes zoster oticus
C. Mastoid surgery
D. Chronic suppurative Otitis media
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Facial Nerve - Course Intracranial pa 15-17mm Intra temporal pa Meatal segment 8-10mm Labyrinthine segment 4.0mm Tympanic / horizontal segment 11.0mm Mastoid / veical segment 13.0mm Extracranial pa Branches Greater superficial petrosal nerve 1st branch Nerve to stapedius Chorda tympani Communicating branch Posterior auricular nerve Muscular branches, peripheral branches Causes of facial nerve palsy Most common cause is idiopathic bell's palsy paralysis acute onset Bell's palsy idiopathic, Ipsilateral lower motor neuron palsy Loss of forehead and brow movements Inability to close eyes drooping of eyelids Loss of nasolabial folds, drooping of lower lip herpes zoster oticus/Ramsay hunt syndrome herpes zoster oticus/Ramsay hunt syndrome Mastoid surgery is the most common iatrogenic cause of facial nerve palsy.

Question: Pain sensations from the ethmoidal sinus are carried by-
A. Frontal Nerve
B. Lacrimal Nerve
C. Nasocilliary Nerve
D. Infra orbital Nerve
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: As discussed in preceeding text, nasociliary nerve–branch of opthalmic division of trigeminal nerve carries pain sensation from ethmoid sinus.

Question: Which of the following is not a feature Eustachian tube in children
A. Wider and shoer shoer
B. Flaccid due to less elastin content
C. Ostmann's pad of fat is more in volume
D. Isthmus is straight in children
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: The Eustachian tube in children is shoer (16-18mm), wider and more horizontal. It is also less taut due to lack of elastin. The above differences make the infant more prone for retrograde reflux of nasopharyngeal secretions and milk while feeding in supine position. Differences between Infant & adult ET INFANT ET ADULT ET Length 16-18 mm 36 mm Angle with horizontal 100 (more horizontal) Normalizes at 7yrs 450 Isthmus Straight Angulated Width Wider bony pa Narrow Cailage Flaccid Rigid Elastin at roof Less dense Very dense Ostmann's pad of fat Less in volume More in volume

Question: Vallecula sign is seen in
A. TB laryngitis
B. Vocal nodule
C. Inveed papilloma
D. Acute epiglottitis
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Depressing the tongue with a tongue depressor may show red and swollen epiglottis. Indirect laryngoscopy may show oedema and congestion of supraglottic structure. This examination is avoided for fear of precipitating complete obstruction. It is better done in the operation theatre where facilities for intubation are available. Ref: PL Dhingra 7th edition of Ear, Nose and Throat; Pg no 327

Question: Gateway of tears is:
A. Rathke pouch
B. Sinus of morgagni
C. Killians dehiscence
D. Pharyngeal bursa
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Killians dehiscence is also called 'gateway of tears'

Question: A young male presents with ear discharge since three years; recently developed swelling in the neck below and behind the angle of mandible, toicollis; on the examination, the external auditory canal was filled with granulation tissue. What is the diagnosis?
A. Luc's abscess
B. Citelli's abscess
C. Bezold's abscess
D. Parapharyngeal abscess
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Bezold's abscess It can occur following acute coalescent mastoiditis when pus breaks through the thin medial side of the tip of the mastoid and presents as a swelling in the upper pa of the neck. The abscess may Lie deep to sternocleidomastoid, pushing the muscle outwards. Follow the posterior belly of digastric and present as swelling between the tip of mastoid and angle of the jaw. Present in the upper pa of the posterior triangle. Reach the parapharyngeal space. Track down along the carotid vessels. Clinical features: Onset is sudden. Pain Fever Tender swelling in the neck Toicollis The patient gives a history of purulent otorrhoea. (Ref: Textbook of diseases of ENT, PL Dhingra, 7th edition, pg no. 87)

Question: Most commonly used tuning fork in ear examination is
A. 128 Hz
B. 256 Hz
C. 512 Hz
D. 1024 Hz
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: 512Hz is used normally Note: These tests are performed with tuning forks of different frequencies such as 128, 256, 512, 1024, 2048 and 4096 Hz, But for routine clinical practice, tuning fork of 512 Hz is ideal. Forks of lower frequencies produce a sense of bone vibration while those of higher frequencies have a shoer decay time and are thus not routinely preferred. Ref: Dhingra; 6th Edition; pg no 21

Question: Presenting symptom of nasal myiasis is
A. Severe irritation with sneezing
B. Maggots
C. Nasal pain
D. Impaired olfaction
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Clinical features of nasal myiasisInitial symptoms (3-4 days maggots):- Intense irritation, sneezing, headache, blood stained discharge, lacrimationLater:- Maggots may crawl out of the nose and there is a foul smellRef: PL Dhingra, Diseases of Ear, Nose & Throat, 7th edition, pg no. 181 - 182

Question: Cadaveric position of vocal cords ?
A. Midline
B. 1.5 mm from midline
C. 3.5 mm from midline
D. 7.5 mm from midline
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. is 'c' i.e., 3.5 mm from midline Position of vocal cords The position of the vocal cords may be described as being in various positions. These are : ? 1. Median position The vocal cords are in midline. This is the position of normal larynx during phonation and in recurrent laryngeal nerve palsy. 2. Paramedian position Just off midline (1.5 mm form midline) This position occurs in normal larynx during strong whisper. This is the resting position of vocal cords after long-term recurrent laryngeal nerve injury. 3. Cadeveric (Intermediate) position (3.5 mm from midline) It is 15-20deg from midline. This is the position of immediate total denervation of both recurrent laryngeal nerve as well as superior laryngeal paralysis, as in high vagal paralysis. 4. Gentle abduction (7 mm from midline) This position is seen during quiet respiration in normal larynx and in paralysis of adductors (very rare). 5. Abduct position (9.5 mm from midline) It is 30-45deg from midline. This is the position of maximum adduction during deep inspiration.

Question: Ethmoidal polyp is ?
A. Due to infection
B. Single
C. Recurrent
D. Occurs in children
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. is 'c' i.e., Recurrent

Question: Caloric test is done for
A. Semicircular canal
B. Macula
C. Saccule
D. Cochlea
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. (a) Semicircular canalRef. Dhingra's ENT 5th ed. / 48* Caloric test is used to assess vestibular function. The basis of this test is to induce nystagmus by thermal stimulation of the vestibular system.* Done by taking water of 2 temperatures, cold (30degC) and hot (44degC).* Position of the test: Supine then lift head at 30deg forward or patient sitting with bending backwards 60*.* This position is used in order to make lateral/ horizontal SCC in vertical position.* Cold water elicits nystagmus in opposite eye and warm water elicit nystagmus in same eye (Mn: COWS).* Interpretation:# Normal: Time taken from start of irrigation to end point of Nystagmus is taken and it is 80 seconds --120 seconds.# Canal paresis: Duration of Nystagmus shortened i.e. < 80 sec.* Indicates depressed function of ipsilateral Labyrinth, vestibular nerve and vestibular nuclei.* It is seen in:# Meniere's disease# Acoustic neuroma# Vestibular neuritis# Vestibular nerve section# Postural vertigo

Question: Intolerance to loud sound, nerve affected is
A. 5th nerve
B. 7th nerve
C. 10th nerve
D. None
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Clinical features of the 7th nerve palsy: Eyeball turns up and out Saliva dribbles Tears flow down Pain in the ear Noise intolerance Loss of taste Ref: Dhingra 7e pg 104.

Question: Von Langenbeck repair is used for treatment of:
A. Cleft lip
B. Cleft palate
C. Septal detion
D. Saddle nose
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Von Langenbeck Repair: Two-stage palate repairs were originally described as a means of treating wide clefts; soft palate repair was done at the same time as lip repair, with the hard palate repaired later after the cleft width had diminished. In a way, this is analogous to lip adhesion; the surgeon is committed to a second operation and has additional scar to confront at the time of the second procedure. The use of two-stage palate repair has consistently been shown to produce poorer speech results when compared with most single-stage techniques, but is still used by some surgeons.

Question: Use of this instrument during examination of the ear provides all except
A. Magnification
B. In suctioning of middle ear secretions
C. Assessing Tympanic Membrane Movement
D. Removal of Foreign body
Correct Answer: D

Question: After mandibulectomy, muscle preventing falling back of tongue -
A. Genioglossus
B. Hyoglossus
C. Palatopharyngeus
D. All of the above
Correct Answer: B

Question: Which of the following malignancy shows least lymph node involvement:
A. Supraglottic
B. Subglottic
C. Glottic cancer
D. Ca nasopharynx
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans: c (Glottic cancer) Ref: Dhingra, 3rd ed, p. 372; 4th ed, p. 286No lymphatics in vocal cords so nodal metastasis are practically never seen in cord lesions unless the disease spreads beyond the membraneous cord. SupraglottisGlottisSubglottisSiteEpiglottisAryepiglottic foldArytenoidVentricular bandsVentricles & sacculeTrue vocal cordsAnt.commissurePost.commissureWall of subglottis upto lower border of cricoid cartilageFrequencyLess frequent than glotticMost commonLeast commonNodal metsNodal mets earlyNo lymph node metsNodal mets as common as in supraglottic varietySymptomsOften silent, hoarseness lateHoarsenessStridor

Question: An elderly diabetic with excruciating pain in ear, appearance of granulation in meatus, skull base infection with facial paralysis should be treated with
A. Penicillin
B. Ciprofloxacin
C. 2nd generation ciphalosporin
D. Erythromycin
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: All clinical features are suggestive of malignant otitis externa, an inflammatory condition of the external ear. Malignant otitis externa (also k/a Necrotizing external otitis) Malignant otitis externa is an inflammatory condition of the external ear usually spreading deep to cause osteomyelitis of temporal bone and base of skull. It occurs primarily in immunocompromised persons, especially older persons with diabetes mellitus, and is often initiated by self-inflicted or iatrogenic trauma to the external auditory canal [May also be seen in pts. who received radiotherapy to skull base I The most frequent pathogen is Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Others may be S. aureus, Staphylococcus epidermidis, Aspergillus, Actinomyces, and some gram-negative bacterial. One of the hallmarkof malignant otitis externs is granulation tissue in the external auditory canal, especially at the hone-cailage junction. As the infection spreads to the temporal bone, it may extend into the cranium and result in cranial nerve palsies (commonly the facial nerve) Cranial nerve involvement indicates poor prognosis. Death is usually due to intracranial complications such as sigmoid sinus thrombosis. It has high moality rate due to which the name 'malignant' is used for this disease. Treatment Includes correction of immunosuppression (when possible), local treatment of the auditory canal, long-term systemic antibiotic therapy, and in selected patients, surgery. - In all cases, the external ear canal is cleansed and a biopsy specimen of the granulation tissue sent for culture. - IV antibiotics is directed against the offending organism. - For Pseudomonas aeruginosa, the most common pathogen, the regimen involves an antipseudomonal penicillin or cephalosporin (3rd generation-piperacillin or ceftazidime) with an aminoglycoside. A fluoroquinolone antibiotic can be used in place of the aminoglycoside. Ear drops containing antipseudomonal antibiotic e.g. ciproflaxacin plus a glucocoticoid is also used. - Early cases can be managed with oral and otic fluoroquinolones only. - Extensive surgical debridement once an impoant pa of the treatment is now rarely needed.

Question: Meniere's disease is characterized by all except -
A. Conductive deafness
B. Sensorineural deafness
C. Vertigo
D. Tinnitus
Correct Answer: A

Question: Semicircular canals are stimulated by:
A. Gravity
B. Linear acceleration
C. Rotation
D. Sound
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Semicircular canals contain cristae which sense angular or rotational acceleration

Question: Which aery does not contribute to little's area:
A. Anterior ethmoidal aery
B. Septalbrach of facial aery
C. Sphenopalatine aery
D. Posterior ethmoidal aery
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Little's area-Anteroinferior pa of nasal septum- formed by- anterior ethmoidal aery,septal branch of superior labial aery,septal brach of sphenopalatine aery,greater palatine aery. Ref.Dhingra 6/e,p 176.

Question: Most common complication of tonsillectomy is-
A. Hemorrhage
B. Teeth injury
C. Pneumonia
D. Otitis media
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. is 'a' i.e., Hemorrhage "Post-tonsillectomy hemorrhage is the most common complication, occuring in approximately 2 to 5%, and should be taken seriously "._________Bellenger's otolaryngologyComplications of tonsillectomyo Complications of tonsillectomy may beImmediateDelayedImmediate complicationsPrimary haemorrhage : Occurs at the time of operation. It can be controlled by pressure, ligation or electrocoagulation of the bleeding vessels.Reactionary haemorrhage: Occurs within a period of 24 hours.Injury to tonsillar pillars, uvula, soft palate, tongue or superior constrictor muscle due to bad surgical technique.Injury to teeth.Aspiration of blood.Facial oedema : Some patients get oedema of the face particularly of the eyelids.Surgical emphysemaDalayed complicationsSecondary haemorrhage: Usually seen between the 5th to 10th post-operative day. It is the result of sepsis and premature separation of the membrane. Usually, it is heralded by bloodstained sputum but may be profuse.Infection : Infection of tonsillar fossa may lead to parapharyngeal abscess or otitis media.Lung complications : Aspiration of blood, mucus or tissue fragments may cause atelectasis or lung abscess.Scarring in soft palate and pillars.Tonsillar remnants : Tonsil tags or tissue, left due to inadequate surgery, may get repeatedly infected.Hypertrophy of lingual tonsil: This is a late complication and is compensatory to loss of palatine tonsils.

Question: Causes of epistaxis are all except
A. Allergic rhinitis
B. Foreign body
C. Tumour
D. Hypeension
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Causes of epistaxis Trauma Infections Foreign bodies Neoplasms of nose and paranasal sinus Atmospheric changes Deted nasal septum Hypeension Pregnancy Leukemia Liver disease Kidney disease Idiopathic Ref: Dhingra 7e pg 197.

Question: Which is called nerve of Wrisberg
A. Motor root of facial nerve
B. Tympanic branch of glossopharyngeal nerve
C. Sensory root of facial nerve
D. Greater auricular nerve
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Facial nerve runs from pons to parotid. It is a mixed nerve having motor and a sensory root. The latter is also called the nerve of Wrisberg and carries secretomotor fibres to lacrimal gland and salivary glands, and brings fibres of taste and general sensation. Nerve of Wrisberg (Nervus intermedius receives fibres from Nucleus tractussolitarious and Nucleus salivatorius superioris Motor fibres take origin from the nucleus of VIIth nerve, hook round the nucleus of VIth nerve and are joined by the sensory root (nerve of Wrisberg).

Question: Gillette's space is:
A. Retropharyngeal space
B. Peritonsillar space
C. Parapharyngeal space
D. None
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: The retropharyngeal space is divided by a midline fibrous raphe into two spaces known as space of Gillette. Peritonsillar space is the space between the capsule of tonsil and the circular muscles of the pharynx. This contains a loose areolar tissue. Infection of this space is known as quinsy.

Question: Which of the following is not true of caloric test?
A. Induction of nystagmus by thermal stimulation
B. Normally, cold water induces nystatmus to opposite side and warm water to same side
C. In canal paresis, the test is inconclusive
D. None
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Nystagmus can be induced both by cold as well as thermal stimulationCold stimulation causes nystagmus towards opposite side while thermal stimulation causes Nystagmus towards same side. (COWS)In canal paresis either there is a reduced or absent response (causes of U/L canal paresis are-U/L vestibular Schwannoma or vestibular neuritis).B/L absence of caloric nystagmus is seen in case of amminoglycoside ototoxicity or postmeningitis

Question: Right-sided vocal cord palsy seen in -
A. Larynx carcinoma
B. Aortic aneurysm
C. Mediastinal lymphadenopathy
D. Vocal nodule
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: First I would like to exclude other three options : -


Aortic aneurysm (option b) and mediastinal lymphadenopathy (option c) cause left sided vocal cord paralysis.
Vocal nodules does not cause vocal cord paralysis. 


Now we are left with option 'a' only : -

"Laryngeal carcinoma especially glottic can cause unilateral or bilateral vocal cord paralysis" ─ Conn's current therapy

So, answer of this question is laryngeal carcinoma as it can cause unilateral (right or left) or bilateral vocal cord paralysis.

Question: Most common site for contact ulcer in larynx is
A. Arytenoids
B. Corniculate
C. Anterior 1/3 rd of vocal cord
D. Cricoid
Correct Answer: A

Question: Which of the following is not a typical feature of Meniere's disease
A. Sensorineural deafness
B. Veigo
C. Pulsatile tinnitus
D. Fluctuating deafness
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Meniere's disease, also called endolymphatic hydrops, is a disorder of the inner ear where the endolymphatic system is distended with endolymph. It is characterized by (i) veigo,(ii) sensorineural hearing loss, -- Hearing improves after the attack and maybe normal during the periods of remission. This fluctuating nature of hearing loss is quite characteristic of the disease. -- Distoion of sound. Some patients complain of distoed hearing. A tone of a paicular frequency may appear normal in one ear and of the higher pitch in the other leading to diplacusis. -- Intolerance to loud sounds. Patients with Meniere's disease cannot tolerate the amplification of sound due to the recruitment phenomenon. (iii) tinnitus is low pitched and roaring type and is aggravated during acute attacks. (iv) aural fullness. (Ref: Textbook of diseased of ENT, PL Dhingra, 7th edition, pg no. 111,112)

Question: Most common cause of U/L mucopurulent rhinorrhea in a child is:
A. Foreign body
B. Adenoids which are blocking the airways
C. Deted nasal septum
D. Inadequately treated acute frontal sinusitis
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: A unilateral nasal discharge is nearly always due to foreign body and if duscharge has an unpleasant smell,it is pathognic. If a child presents with unilateral,foul smeling nasal discharge,foreign body must be excluded. Ref Dhingra 6/e,p 161.

Question: 40 year old male with sputum AFB +ve,complains of Hoarseness of voice and painful swallowing on examination vocal cord shows mamillated adenoids and hyperaemia the most likely diagnosis is
A. Rinke's edema
B. Epiglottitis
C. TB larynx
D. Cancer of larynx
Correct Answer: C

Question: A pathologist is observing a slide. He repos seeing perineural invasion. In which one of the following perineural invasion is most commonly seen?
A. Adenocarcinoma
B. Adenoid cystic carcinoma
C. Basal Cell Adenoma
D. Squamous cell carcinoma
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Adenoid cystic carcinoma

Question: Gelle&;s test is done in
A. Otosclerosis
B. Serous otitis media
C. Traumatic deafness
D. Senile deafness
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Gelle's test: It is also a test of bone conduction and examines the effect of increased air pressure in ear canal on the hearing. Normally, when air pressure is increased in the ear canal by Siegel's speculum, it pushes the tympanic membrane and ossicles inwards, raises the intralabyrinthine pressure and causes immobility of basilar membrane and decreased hearing, but no change in hearing is observed when ossicular chain is fixed or disconnected. Gelle's test is performed by placing a vibrating fork on the mastoid while changes in air pressure in the ear canal are brought about by Siegel's speculum. Gelle's test is positive in nor- mal persons and in those with sensorineural hearing loss. It is negative when ossicular chain is fixed or disconnected. It was a popular test to find out stapes fixation in otosclerosis but has now been superceded by tympanometry. Ref:- Dhingra; pg num:- 22,23

Question: Who among the following has contributed to the development of neuro-otology and is considered as the father of 'nen ro-otology'?
A. Julius Lampa
B. John J. Shea Jr
C. William F. House
D. Hales Main
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. c. William F. House (Ref www.audiology.org For the pioneering work in the field of neuro-otology, William F. House considered as 'Father of Neuro-otology'. William F. House considered as 'Father of Neuro-otology' because of his pioneering development approaches for the removal of acoustic tumors and the management of patients with disabling veigo.

Question: Most common pa of larynx involved in Tuberculosis is
A. Anterior
B. Posterior
C. Middle
D. Anywhere
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Tubercular laryngitisThe disease affects the posterior third of larynx more commonly than anterior paThe pas affected in descending order of frequency are:- i) Interarytenoid fold, ii) Ventricular band, iii) Vocal cords, iv) EpiglottisRef: PL Dhingra, Diseases of Ear, Nose & Throat, 7th edition, pg no. 329 - 330

Question: The location of schatzki&;s ring is
A. Lower end of pharynx
B. Upper end of esophagus
C. Lower end of esophagus
D. Antrum of stomach
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: SCHATZKI'S RING It occurs at the junction of squamous and columnar epithelium at the lower end of oesophagus and has also been called lower oesophageal ring. Usually seen in patients above 50 years of age. Cause is unknown. Symptomatic patients complain of intermittent dysphagia and some may even present with bolus obstruction. It may be associated with hiatus hernia. Treatment is oesophageal dilatation. Ref:- Dhingra; pg num:-345

Question: Cauliflower ear is associated with:
A. Otomycosis
B. Hematoma
C. Otosclerosis
D. None of the above
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: A patient with an auricular hematoma usually presents with an edematous, fluctuant, and ecchymotic pinna, with loss of the normal cailaginous landmarks. Failure to evacuate the hematoma may lead to cailage necrosis and permanent disfigurement known as "cauliflower ear."

Question: Which Ca has best prognosis:
A. Carcinoma lip
B. Carcinoma cheek
C. Carcinoma tongue
D. Carcinoma palate
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Oral malignancy with best prognosis is carcinoma lips. Oral cancer with worst prognosis is floor of mouth carcinoma.

Question: Drug treatment for laryngeal stenosis is
A. Adriamycin
B. Mitomycin C
C. Cyclophosphamide
D. Doxorubicin
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Mitomycin-C is an antineoplastic antibiotic that acts as an alkylating agent by inhibiting DNA and protein synthesis. ... Topical application of mitomycin-C (0.4 mg/mL) was used as an adjuvant treatment in the endoscopic laser management of laryngeal and tracheal stenosis Ref: Internet sources

Question: All are major symptoms of sinusitis except ?
A. Nasal bluckage
B. Facial congeion
C. Nasal congestion
D. Halitosis
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ans. is 'd' i.e., Halitosis The clinical symptoms of acute sinusitis have been classified into major and minor Major Facial pain or pressure Purulent nasal discharge Fever Nasal congestion Nasal obstruction Hyposmia or Anosmia Facial congestion or fullness Minor Headache Cough Fatigue Halitosis Dental pain Ear pain or pressure

Question: A man presented with persistent ear pain and discharge, retro-orbital pain and modified radical mastoidectomy was done to him. Patient comes back with persistent discharge, what is your diagnosis?
A. Diffuse serous labyrinthitis
B. Purulent labyrinthitis
C. Petrositis
D. Latent mastoiditis
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: In a patient with CSOM, persistent ear discharge with or without deep seated pain in spite of an adequate coical or modified mastoidectomy points towards petrositis. Spread of infection from middle ear and mastoid to the petrous pa of temporal bone is petrositis it can also involve adjacent 5th cranial nerve and 6" cranial nerve when it produces classical triad of symptoms - 6th nerve palsy, retro orbital pain (5th nerve) and persistent discharge from the ear, known as Gradenigo's syndrome Treatment Adequate drainage is the mainstay of treatment along with specific antibiotic therapy. Modified radical or radical mastoidectomy is often required if not done already. The fistulous tract should be identified, curetted and enlarged to provide free drainage.

Question: The commonest cranial nerve involved in acoustic neuroma is:
A. IX
B. VI
C. VIII
D. X
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: As the eighth nerve schwannoma grows, it extends into the posterior fossa to occupy the angle between the cerebellum and pons (cerebellopontine angle). In this lateral position, it is so situated as to compress the seventh, fifth, and less often the ninth and tenth cranial nerves, which are implicated in various combinations. Later it displaces and compresses the pons and lateral medulla and obstructs the CSF circulation.

Question: A person present with cribriform plate fracture with CSF rhinorrhea. What will be immediate treatment?
A. Frequent blowing of nose
B. Plugging of nose with paraffin
C. Craniotomy
D. Antibiotics with wait for 7 days
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: TREATMENT OF CSF RHINORRHEA Early cases of post-traumatic CSF rhinorrhoea can be managed by conservative measures such as bed rest, elevating the head of the bed, stool softeners, and avoidance of nose blowing, sneezing and straining. Prophylactic antibiotics can be used to prevent meningitis. Acetazolamide decreases CSF formation. These measures can be combined with lumbar drain if indicated. Surgical repair can be done by the following: 1. Neurosurgical intracranial approach. 2. Extradural approaches such as external ethmoidectomy for cribriform plate and ethmoid area, trans-septal sphenoidal approach for sphenoid and osteoplastic flap approach for frontal sinus leak. 3. Transnasal endoscopic approach. With the advent of endoscopic surgery for nose and sinuses, most of the leaks from the anterior cranial fossa and sphenoid sinus can be managed endoscopically with a success rate of 90% with first attempt. Principles of repair include: (a) Defining the sites of bony areas . It can be (i) Cribriform plate (ii) Lateral lamina close to anterior ethmoid aery (iii) Roof of ethmoid (iv) Frontal sinus leak (v) Sphenoid sinus (b) Preparation of graft site. (c) Underlay grafting of the fascia extradurally followed by placement of mucosa (as a free graft or pedicled flap) (d) If bony defect is larger than 2 cm, it is repaired with cailage (from nasal septum or auricular concha) followed by placement of mucosa. (e) Placement of surgicel and gelfoam fuher strengthens the area. This is followed by a high antibiotic smeared nasal pack. Sometimes fat from the thigh or abdomen is used to plug the defect in place of fascia graft. (f) Lumbar drain if CSF pressure is high. (g) Antibiotics CSF leak from frontal sinus often requires osteoplastic flap, operation and obliteration of the sinus with fat. Ref : ENT textbook by Dhingra 6th edition Pgno : 163-165

Question: Lancinating pain around the tonsils during eating is indicative of
A. Trigeminal neuralgia
B. Glossopharyngeal neuralgia
C. Facial neuralgia
D. None of the above
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: (B) Glossopharyngeal neuralgia # Nerve Supply of Tonsils:* Lesser palatine branches of sphenopalatine ganglion (CN V) and glossopharyngeal nerve provide sensory nerve supply.

Question: In emergency tracheostomy following structures are damaged except:
A. Isthmus of thyroid
B. Inferior thyoid vein
C. Inferior thyroid aery
D. Thyroid ima
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Structures which lie below the midline viz. isthmus of thyroid and thyroid ima aery can be damaged in emergency tracheostomy. Inferior thyroid veins emerge at the lower border of the isthmus form a plexus in front of the trachea and drains into brachiocephalic vein can be damaged during tracheostomy but inferior thyroid aery, a branch of thyrocervical trunk of subclan aery lies laterally away from midline and can thus escape injury.

Question: The most common causative organism for external otitis in adults is:
A. Streptococcus viridans
B. Staphylococcus epidermidis
C. Pseudomonas aeruginosa
D. E. coli
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Otitis externa is an inflammatory and infectious process of the external auditory canal. Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Staphylococcus aureus are the most commonly isolated organisms. Less commonly isolated organisms include Proteus species, Staphylococcus epidermidis, diphtheroids, and Escherichia coli.

Question: The muscle responsible for falsetto voice of puber phonia is
A. Vocalis
B. Thyroarytenoid
C. Posterior cricoarytenoid
D. Cricothyroid
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Cricothyroid is the main tensor responsible for the falsetto voice in puberphonia. There is hyperkinetic function and spasm of cricothyroid muscle. Ref:- TB of ENT Hazarika; pg num:- 636

Question: At which level sound is painful -
A. 100-120dB
B. 80-85dB
C. 60-65dB
D. 20-25dB
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Intensity

Whisper - 30 dB
Normal conversation - 60 dB
Shout - 90 dB
Discomfort of ear - 120 dB
Pain in ear -130 dB

Ref. Dhingra, 6/e, p 19

Question: A 3 years old boy presented with fever with pain in the throat and difficulty in deglutition. On examination following findings are seen. What is the most likely diagnosis?
A. Peritonsillar abscess
B. Parapharyngeal abscess
C. Ludwig's angina
D. Retropharyngeal abscess
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: PERITONSILLAR ABSCESS(QUINSY) Collection of pus between the fibrous capsule of the tonsil, and the superior constrictor muscle of the pharynx. Condition is generally unilateral. Tonsil is swollen, red, hot & congested. Uvula and soft palate are pushed to opposite side. Uvula Points towards Normal side as shown in the image. Organism involved are Streptococcus, Staph aureus, anaerobic organism, more often mixed growth is seen. Parapharyngeal abscess (abscess of lateral pharyngeal space, pterygomaxillary, space, pharyngomaxillary space: Swelling is on lateral wall of Pharynx pushing tonsils towards midline. Patient may also have a swelling in neck, posterior to SCM muscle. Patient may also present with Trismus. Ludwig's angina is cellulitis of submandibular space.

Question: Cholesteatoma commonly associated with:
A. Atticoantral CSOM
B. Tubotympanic CSOM
C. Tympanosclerosis
D. Foreign body in ear
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: (a) Atticoantral CSOM(Ref. Scott Brown, 8th ed. Vol 2; 989)Tympanosclerosis is hyalinisation and calcification of the fibrous layer of tympanic membrane. It is not associated with cholesteatoma. Foreign body in ear does not lead to cholesteatoma formation.Keratosis obturans is the collection of desquamated keratin debris in the external auditory canal. This keratin debris comes from the external auditory canal stratified squamous epithelium.

Question: What is true in case of perforation of pars flaccida?
A. CSOM is a rare cause
B. Associated with cholesteatoma
C. Usually due to trauma
D. All of the above
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. B Associated with cholesteatomaTympanic membrane can be divided in 2 pas:Parstensa : It forms most of the tympanic membrane. Its periphery is thickened to form fibro cailaginous ring called as annulus tympanicus.Pars Falccida : It is situated above the lateral process of malleus between the notch of Rivinus and the anterior and posterior malleolar folD. Perforation in tympanic membrane can be in Central* Occurs in tubotympanic type ofCSOM* Not associated with cholesteatoma* Considered safe Marginal (Perforation destroys even the annulus) theraby reaching sulcus tympanicusMost common is posterio superiormarqinal?- occur in attico antral type of CSOM- associated with cholesteatoma- considered unsafe / dangerous Attic perforation NoteMost common cause of perforation is chronic otitis mediaMnemonicFamousF - Perforation of Pars FlaccidA.A - Seen in Atticoantral/marginal perforationM - Associated with CSOM (of atticoantral type) or acute necrotizing otitis mediao - Associated with CholesteatomaU - Unsafe typeS - Surgery is TOe.

Question: Adam's apple seen in boys is because of:
A. Hyoid bone
B. Tracheal rings
C. Thyroid cailage
D. Cricoid cailage
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Prominance of Thyroid cailage (because of sharp angle) in males is called Adam's apple. Thyroid cailage with right and left lamina both meet at midline and form an angle of 90deg in males, 120deg in females. At rest it lies at level of C3

Question: Drug of choice for treatment of epiglottitis is
A. Ceftriaxone
B. Sulphamethoxazone
C. Chloramphenicol
D. Clindamycin
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ampicillin or third generation cephalosporins are effective against H. influenzae and are given by parenteral route (i.m. or i.v.) without waiting for results of throat swab and blood culture. Ref: PL Dhingra 7th edition of Ear, Nose and Throat; Pg no 328

Question: Last taste sensation discovered is-
A. Umami
B. Sweetness
C. Bitter
D. Sour
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. is 'a' i.e., Umami o Umami a savory taste s one of the five basic tastes (together with sweetness, sourness, bitterness, and saltiness)o People taste umami through receptors specific to glutamate. Glutamate is widely present in savory foods, such as meat broths and fermented products, and commonly added to some foods in the form of monosodium glutamate (MSG) Since umami has its own receptors rather than arising out of a combination of the traditionally recognized taste receptors, scientists now consider umami to be a distinct taste

Question: Not a cause of objective tinnitus ?
A. Palatal myoclonus
B. Glomus tumor
C. Carotid aery aneurysm
D. Presbyacusis
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ans. is 'd' i.e., Presbyacusis Tinnitus Tinnitus is ringing sound or noise in the ear. The characteristic feature is that the origin of this sound is within the patient.

Question: Phelp's sign is seen in:
A. Glomus jugulare
B. Vestibular Schawannoma
C. Maniere's disease
D. Neurofibromatosis
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Phelp's sign Phelp sign This sign is seen on CT scan In CT- in case of glomus jugulare tumor the normal crest between the carotid canal and jugulare tumor is absent whereas it is not so in case of glomus tympanicum

Question: Presence of delta sign on contrast enhanced CT SCAN suggests presence of ?
A. Lateral Sinus thrombophlebitis
B. Cholesteatoma
C. Cerebellar abscess
D. Mastoiditis
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. is 'a' i.e., Lateral Sinus thrombophlebitis LATERAL SINUS THROMBOPHLEBITIS (SIGMOID SINUS THROMBOSIS) Lateral or sigmoid sinus thrombophlebitis arises from inflammation in the adjacent mastoid. It may occur as a complication of : ? Acute coalescent mastoiditis CSOM and cholesteatoma Clinical features Hectic Picket-Fence type of fever with rigor. Headache, Progressive anemia and emaciation. Griesinger's sign : - odema over the posterior pa of mastoid due to thrombosis of mastoid emissary veins. Papilloedema Tobey-Ayer test :- Compression of vein on the thrombosed side produces no effect while compression of vein on healthy side produces rapid rise in CSF pressure which will be equal to bilateral compression of jugular veins. Crowe-Beck test :- Pressure on jugular vein of healthy side produces engorgement of retinal veins. Pressure on affected side does not produce such change. Tenderness along jugular vein Imaging studies Contrast-enhanced CT scan can show sinus thrombosis by typical delta-sign. It is a triangular area with rim enhancement, and central low density area is seen in posterior cranial fossa on axial cuts. Delta-sign may also be seen on contrast enhanced MRI.

Question: Nasopharyngeal carcinoma affects which age group
A. Children
B. Adolescents
C. 3rd decade
D. 5th decade
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: * Age:- It is mostly seen in fifth to seventh decades but may involve younger age groups. It is not uncommon to see the cancer of nasopharynx in the twenties and thiies. * Sex:-Males are three times more prone than females. (Ref: Diseases of Ear, Nose and Throat, P.L Dhingra, 7th edition, page 284)

Question: In Complete deft the hard palate is totally separated from?
A. Maxilla
B. Soft palate
C. Vomer
D. All
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: ANSWER: (C) VomerREF: With textPalate cleft can occur as complete (soft and hard palate, possibly including a gap in the jaw) or incomplete (a 'hole' in the roof of the mouth, usually as a cleft soft palate).Normally the hard palate is continuous in front and laterally with the alveolar processes of the maxilla, and gives attachment posteriorly to the soft palate."In cleft palate the hard palate may or may not be attached to the vomer. If it is attached to the vomer, it is called as incomplete. Hard palate in complete cleft palate is totally separated from vomer' REF: Cleft lip and palate: diagnosis and management - Samuel Berkowitz Page 50."In incomplete unilateral cleft palate, nasal septum (Vomer) is attached to the uncleft side of hard palate. In bilateral complete deft lip and palate, Vomer is free and septum hangs freely"REF: Synopsis of Oral & Maxillofacial Surgery by Ghosh page 155Incomplete deft palateUnilateral complete lip and palateBilateral complete lip and palate

Question: Name of the curved laryngoscope ?
A. Miller
B. Macintosh
C. Muller
D. Merkel
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Laryngoscopy (larynx + scopy) is a medical procedure that is used to obtain a view of the vocal folds and the glottis. Following are the types of the available laryngoscopes :- i) Straight blade: Miller ii) Curved blade: Macintosh

Question: Epistaxis in elderly person is most commonly due to:
A. Foreign body
B. Bleeding disorder
C. Hypertension
D. Nasopharyngeal carcinoma
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: (c) Hypertension(Ref. Cummings, 6th ed. 680)The most common cause of epistaxis in an elderly person is hypertension.Foreign body is not seen at this age.Bleeding disorder will present with bleeding from multiple sites.Nasopharyngeal carcinoma presents with upper deep cervical lymph node. Nasal obstruction and blood tinged nasal discharge can occur later on.

Question: Reflux laryngitis produces -a) Sub- glottic stenosis b) Ca larynxc) Cord fixationd) Acute supra- glottitise) Laryngitis
A. abe
B. bcd
C. cde
D. acd
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: There are lots of controversies regarding the reflux laryngitis secondary to reflux gastrointestinal disease. But now some studies document that there is a clear relation between the two.
Reflux laryngitis may have the following sequlae:

– Bronchospasm
– Chemical pneumonitis
– Refractory subglottic stenosis 
– Refractory contact ulcer
– Peptic laryngeal granuloma
– Acid laryngitis (Heart burn, burning pharyngeal discomfort, nocturnal chocking due to interarytenoid pachydermia)
– Laryngeal Carcinoma (According to recent reports laryngeal reflux is the cause of laryngeal carcinoma in patients who are life time non-smokers).
Laryngopharyngeal Reflux
Here classical GERD symptoms are absent. Patients have more of daytime/upright reflux without the nocturnal/supine reflux of GERD. In laryngopharyngeal reflux esophageal motility and lower esophageal sphincter is normal, while upper esophageal sphincter is abnormal. The traditional diagnostic tests for GERD are not useful in LPR.
Symptom Chronic or Intermittent dysphonia, vocal strain, foreign body sensation, excessive throat mucus, Postnasal discharge and cough. Laryngeal findings: Interarytenoid bunching, Posterior laryngitis and subglottic edema (Pseudosulcus)
Sequelae of Laryngopharyngeal Reflux 

Subglottic stenosis
Carcinoma larynx
Contact ulcer/granuloma
Cricoarytenoid joint fixity
Vocal nodule/polyp
Sudden infant deaths
Laryngomalacia (Association)

Treatment is in similar lines as GERD, but we need to give proton pump inhibitors at a higher dose and for a longer duration (at least 6–8 months).

Question: All are true about vocal cord nodule except:
A. Caused by phonotrauma
B. Commonly occur at Junction of middle & posterior 1/3
C. Common at junction of A 1/3 with P 2/3
D. Common in teachers
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans:B (Commonly occur at Junction of middle & posterior 1/3 ) VOCAL NODULES (SINGER'S OR SCREAMER S NODES)PL Dhingra 6th/303-04# Their size varies from tha t of pin-head to half a peaThey are the result of vocal trauma when person speaks in unnatural low tones for prolonged periods or at high intensitiesThey mostly affect teachers, actors, vendors or pop singers. They are also seen in school going children who are too assertive <PS# talkativePatients complains of hoarseness. Vocal fatigue & pain in the neck on prolonged phonation are other common symptomsEarly cases of vocal nodules can he treated conservatively by educating the patient in proper use of voice. With this treatment, many nodules in children disappear completelySurgery is required for large nodules or nodules of long standing in adults. They are excised with precision under operating microscope either with cold instruments or laser avoiding any trauma to the underlying vocal ligamentSpeech therapy & re-education in voice production are essential to prevent their recurrenceVocal nodules(Singer's or Screamer's nodes): They appear symmetrically on the free edge of vocal cord, at the junction of anterior one-third, with the posterior two-third, as this is the area of maximum vibration of cord & thus subject to maximum trauma P.L. Dhingra 6th/303Fig. .Vocal nodules. Typically, theyr form at the junction of anterior one- third with posterior two-thirds of vocal cards

Question: Columella effect is seen in
A. Tympanoplasty
B. Septoplasty
C. Tracheostomy
D. None of the above
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Columella effect is seen in type 3 tympanoplasty (myringostapediopexy) where single ossicle remains just like that of bird&;s ear. In Type III tympanoplasty Malleus and incus are absent. Graft is placed directly on the stapes head. It is also called myringostapediopexy or columella tympanoplasty. Re: Textbook of Ear, Nose and Throat, Dhingra, 6th Edition, page 30.

Question: Semicircular canal perceives ___________
A. Linear acceleration
B. Angular acceleration
C. Both
D. None
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: They respond to angular acceleration and deceleration. The three canals lie at right angles to each other but the one which lies at right angles to the axis of rotation is stimulated the most. Thus horizontal canal will respond maximum to rotation on the veical axis and so on. Due to this arrangement of the three canals in three different planes, any change in position of head can be detected.

Question: A 38-year-old gentleman repos of decreased hearing in the right ear for the last two years. On testing with a 512 Hz tuning fork, the Rinne&;s test without masking is negative in the right ear and positive on the left ear. With Weber&;s test, the tone is perceived as louder in the right ear. The most likely diagnosis in the patient is
A. Right conductive hearing loss
B. Right sensorineural hearing loss
C. Left sensorineural hearing loss
D. Left conductive hearing loss
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: The characteristics of conductive hearing loss are: 1. Negative Rinne test, i.e. BC > AC. 2. Weber lateralized to poorer ear. 3. Normal absolute bone conduction. 4. Low frequencies affected more. 5. Audiometry shows bone conduction better than air conduction with air-bone gap. Greater the air-bone gap, more is the conductive loss 6. Loss is not more than 60 dB. 7. Speech discrimination is good. Ref: Dhingra 7e pg 31.

Question: Millard repair is used for treatment of:
A. Cleft lip
B. Cleft palate
C. Meningocele
D. Saddle nose
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: The rotation advancement cleft lip repair, also referred to as a Millard repair, is probably the most commonly performed repair today. Almost no tissue is discarded; the medial lip element is rotated downward, even with a back cut, if necessary, and the lateral lip element is advanced into the defect under the nasal sill. Mucosal flaps are used to line the nose and the vestibule of the lip

Question: A 16 years old girl presented with history of nasal obstruction for last 2 months. A CT Scan was done and following findings are seen. What is the most likely diagnosis?
A. Juvenile Nasopharyngeal Angiofibroma
B. Antrochoanal polyp
C. Nasopharyngeal carcinoma
D. Adenoid Hyperophy
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: CT Scan picture shows Crescent sign or Dodd's Sign seen in Antrochoanal Polyp Adenoid hyperophy: Dodd's Sign is negative JNAF- Epistaxis in adolescent males NPC- Old age, presents generally with Neck node metastasis

Question: Most common congenital dysplasia of Ear is
A. Michel aplasia
B. Mondini's dysplasia
C. Alexander's dysplasia
D. Scheibe's dysplasia
Correct Answer: D

Question: Typical clinical features of Homer's syndrome include all except:
A. Dilated pupil
B. Ptosis
C. Enophthalmos
D. Nasal stuffiness
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Homer's syndrome is due to interruption of sympathetic fibres and therefore causes meiosis (constriction of pupil). Nasal stuffiness is due to dilatation of blood vessels.

Question: A patient presented to ENT OPD with complaints of headache and nasal stuffiness. On CT scan Heterogeneous opacification involving multiple sinuses along with Bone erosion (as shown below) was noticed. What would be the most likely diagnosis?
A. Acute bacterial rhinosinusitis
B. Chronic Bacterial rhinosinusitis
C. Allergic Fungal rhinosinusitis
D. Invasive Fungal Rhinosinusitis
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Heterogeneous opacification in multiple sinuses with areas of central hypoattenuation is characteristic of AFRS. Erosion of medial wall of right orbit can be clearly seen without any invasion into the orbit as Medial Rectus Muscle can be clearly seen with out distoion. ( compare with Left Side) Areas of increased signal intensity are thought to be due to the accumulation of heavy metals such as iron, manganese, and calcium within the inspissated allergic mucin.

Question: Hearing loss of 65dB, what is the grade of deafness-
A. Mild
B. Moderate
C. Severe
D. Moderately severe
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ans. is 'd' i.e., Moderately severe o WHO recommended the following classification on the basis of pure tone audiogram.Hearing threshold in better ear (average of 500,1000,2000Hz)Degree of impairment (WHO classification)Ability to understand speech0-25Not significantNo significant difficulty with faint speech2640MildDifficulty with faint speech.41-55ModerateFrequent difficulty with normal speech.56-70Moderately severeFrequent difficulty even with loud speech71-91SevereCan understand only shouted or amplified speechAbove 91ProfoundUsually cannot understand even amplified speech

Question: Cause of U/L secretory otitis media in an adult is -
A. CSOM
B. Nasopharyngeal carcinoma
C. Mastoiditis
D. Foreign body of external ear
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Unilateral serous otitis media in an adult should always raise the suspicion of a benign / malignant tumor of nasopharynx
“In adults presenting with a unilateral middle ear effusion the possibility of a nasopharyngeal carcinoma should be considered”.
Ref. Dhingra 5/e, p 72, 6/e, p 251; Current Laryngology 2/e, p 659

Question: A patient of CSOM has choleastatoma and presents with vertigo. Treatment of choice would be -
A. Antibiotics and labyrinthine sedative
B. Myringoplasty
C. Immediate mastoid exploration
D. Labyrinthectomy
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: The patient is presenting with CSOM and vertigo which means cholesteatoma has led to fistula formation involving semicircular canals which in turn has caused vertigo. So the management is immediate mastoid exploration to remove the cholesteatoma.

Question: Tripod fracture is the name given for
A. Zygomatic fracture
B. Maxillary fracture
C. Mandibular fracture
D. Temporal fracture
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Zygoma fracture is also known as tripod fracture. Clinical features of zygoma fracture Considerable swelling over zygomatic arch is common and makes clinical diagnosis more difficult. Flattening of malar prominence. Step-deformity of infraorbital margin. Anaesthesia in the distribution of infraorbital nerve. Trismus, due to depression of zygoma on the underlying coronoid process. Oblique palpebral fissure, due to the displacement of lateral palpebral ligament. Restricted ocular movement, due to entrapment of inferior rectus muscle. It may cause diplopia. Periorbital emphysema, due to escape of air from the maxillary sinus on nose-blowing. The mucosa of the maxillary sinus may be lacerated and cause epistaxis on that side. Fracture of the zygoma may or may not be painful to palpation and running a finger along the zygomatic arch may give a feel of a depressed fracture or a small dimple. The cheek may appear flattened compared to symmetry with the opposite side. This may be obvious immediately following trauma or several days later once swelling has subsided.

Question: Cold caloric test stimulates
A. Cochlea
B. Lateral semicircular canal
C. Posterior semicircular canal
D. All
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Stimulation of semicircular canal produces nystagmus and the direction of nystagmus is determined by the plane of the canal being stimulated. In cold caloric test, the lateral semicircular canal is stimulated. (Ref: Diseases of EAR, NOSE AND THROAT by PL DHINGRA - 6th Edition)

Question: Telefono is
A. Pulling of hair
B. Beating on soles
C. Beating on ears
D. Beating on fingers
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: TELEFONO consists of repeated slapping of the sides of the head by open palms of the assailant this may cause rupture of ear drums. Ref : internet sources

Question: In conductive deafness of right ear, Weber's test will show?
A. Lateralised to right side
B. Lateralised to left side
C. Normal
D. Centralised
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: In middle ear pathology usually there is conductive deafness. With a unilateral conductive hearing loss, the tone is perceived in the affected ear. With a unilateral sensorineural hearing loss, the tone is perceived in the unaffected ear.

Question: In Adenoids hyperophy, treatment is
A. Nasal decongestants
B. Antibiotics
C. B-blockers
D. B2-agonists
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: When symptoms are not marked, breathing exercises, decongestant nasal drops, and antihistaminics. When symptoms are marked adenoidectomy is done. (Ref: Diseases of Ear, Nose and Throat, PL Dhingra; 7th edition, pg no. 276)

Question: Most common site of carcinoma of paranasal sinus is?
A. Frontal
B. Ethmoid
C. Maxillary
D. Sphenoid
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. (c) MaxillaryRef: Dhingra's 4th ed p-195

Question: Which of the following is not a feature of chronic tonsillitis?
A. Fever
B. Halitosis
C. Recurrent attacks of sore throat
D. Choking spells at night
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. is 'a' i.e., Fever(ref Dhingra 6h/e p. 258]Fever is a symptom in case of acute tonsillitis, not chronic tonsillitis.Chronic tonsillitis is characterized by:- Recurrent attacks of sore throat or acute tonsillitis.

Question: Essential radiological feature of acute mastoiditis is:
A. Temporal bone pneumatization
B. Clouding of air cells of mastoid
C. Rarefaction of petrous bone
D. Thickening of temporal bone
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: (b) Clouding of air cells of mastoid(Ref. Cummings, 6th ed., 2161)X-ray mastoid and CT scan shows clouding of air cells because of the collection of exudates in them. Later on mastoid pneumatisation is lost and a single mastoid cavity may be seen.

Question: Palpatory thud audible slap is seen in:
A. Tracheal foreign body
B. Bronchial foregion body
C. Laryngeal foreign body
D. None
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: A foreign body in trachea may move up and down the trachea between the carnia and the undersurface of vocal cords causing "audible slap" and "palpatory thud."

Question: "Tear drop" sign on X-ray PNS is seen in
A. Blow out fracture of the floor of the orbit
B. Comminuted fracture of the maxilla
C. Fracture of the nasal bone
D. Fracture of the mandible
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. a (Blow out fracture of the floor of the orbit) (Ref. Grainger Diagnostic Rad 4th/2527; Ref . Q. 159. Of MH-2207)BLOW-OUT FRACTURE is caused by fracturing of the orbital walls with herniation of orbital contents and subsequent tethering of the globe, resulting in pain and diplopia. It usually involves the orbital floor with 'trap-door deformity' on skull AP view or characteristic "Tear drop" sign on X-ray PNS.Also Know:# Tripod Fracture: zygomaticomaxillary fracture# "pyramidal" fracture = Le Fort II fracture (fracture medial orbital and lateral maxillary walls).# Bare orbit sign: Neurofibromatosis# Coke-bottle sign: thyroid ophthalmopathy# "Mushroom-shaped" posterior segment mass: choroidal melanoma# Calcification is pathognomonic of: Retinoblastoma# Most common intraorbital tumor in adults: Cavernous hemangioma.

Question: Cauliflower ear is -
A. Keloid
B. Perchondritis in Boxers
C. Squamous cell carcinoma
D. Anaplastic cell carcinoma
Correct Answer: B

Question: CSOM with Picket fence fever is seen in
A. Meningitis
B. Sigmoid Sinus Thrombosis
C. Brain Abscess
D. Extradural Abscess
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Sigmoid sinus thrombosis/lateral sinus thrombosis is an inflammation of inner wall of lateral venous sinus with formation of an intra sinus thrombus It occurs as a complication of chronic suppuration of middle ear or acute coalescent mastoiditis, and cholesteatoma Picket fence fever temperature never comes back to normal baseline. Remittent fever. Complications of CSOM - Intra temporal Intracranial Mastoiditis Meningitis - m/c Petrositis Brain abscess Facial paralysis Extradural abscess Labyrinthitis Subdural abscess Lateral sinus thrombophlebitis Otitic hydrocephalus

