Question: A 6hours old snake bite patient comes to emergency with mild local edema at the injury site. On examination no abnormalities detected and lab repos are normal. Most appropriate management is
A. Incision and suction
B. Wait and watch
C. Local subcutaneous antisnake venom
D. Intravenous antisnake venom
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: All patients with a history of snake bite should be observed for 8-12 h after the bite, if the skin is broken and the offending snake cannot be positively identified as non-poisonous. Ref: Krishnan vij ; 5th ed; Page no: 484

Question: Best indicator of antemoum drowning is :
A. Froth in mouth and nostrils
B. Cutis anserina
C. Washerman's hand
D. Water in nose
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: A i.e. Fine froth in mouth & nostril

Question: According to recent SC judgment, doctor can be charged for medical negligence under 304-A, only if: AIIMS 12
A. He is from corporate hospital
B. Negligence is from inadveent error
C. Simple negligence
D. Gross negligence
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ans. Gross negligence

Question: Last organ to putrefy in females is?
A. Liver
B. Uterus
C. Brain
D. Breast
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. is 'b' i.e., Uterus Order of putrefactiono Order of appearance of putrefaction from earliest to last is : larynx, trachea > stomach, intestine > spleen, liver > brain, lungs > heart > kidney, bladder > uterus/prostate > bone.o Amongst the soft tissues uterus in female and prostate in malesm are last to undergo putrefaction, as uterus and prostate resist putrefaction. Otherwise bones are last to undergo putrefaction, overall.

Question: For exhumation the order should be passed by -
A. Chief judicial magistrate
B. Executive magistrate
C. Police officer
D. Session judge
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: The body is exhumed only when, there is written order from the executive magistrate.

Question: Magistrate inquest not needed in: JIPMER 14
A. Homicide
B. Exhumation
C. Police custody death
D. Dowry death
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. Homicide

Question: Which of the following condition is necessary prerequisite for this change?
A. Rupture of membranes
B. Scanty liquor amnii
C. Adequate liquor amnii
D. Air inside the uterine cavity
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. (C). Adequate liquor amniiThe photograph shows maceration, a sign of intrauterine death.Conditions favoring maceration: Intact membranes; adequate liquor amnii & NO air.

Question: Where does the "knot" is put in the neck during judicial hanging?
A. The back of the neck
B. Under angle of jaw
C. Below the chin
D. Choice of hangman
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: In judicial hanging, a rope to allow a drop of five to seven metres according to the weight, build and age of the person, is looped round the neck, with the knot under the angle of the jaw. This causes fracture-dislocation usually at the level of the second and third, or third and fouh cervical veebrae. Ref: The essentials of forensic medicine and toxicology by Dr K S Narayan Reddy, 27th edition, Page 306.

Question: A 2-year-old child had burns on buttocks, both legs, face, neck and singeing of hair. Total surface area burnt: JIPMER 14
A. 27%
B. 37%
C. 45%
D. 55%
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. 37%

Question: Black eye is a type of -
A. Patterend abrasion
B. Ectopic abrasion
C. Ectopic bruise
D. Friction abrasion
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: The synopsis of forensic medicine & toxicology ; Dr k.s.narayan reddy ; 28th edition ; Pg .no . 107 Black eye is the most common example for ectopic bruising or percolated contusion .

Question: Following death of a person, what happens to potassium level in the vitreous.
A. Potassium level falls
B. Potassium level increases
C. Remains unchanged
D. It depends on cause of death
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Potassium concentration raises at the rate of 0.17-0.25 mmol per hour following death. It helps in determination of time since death.

Question: Under transplantation of humans organs act, the punishment for the doctor involved is
A. < 1 year
B. < 2 years
C. 2-5 years
D. > 5 years
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: The Transplantation of Human Organs Act 1994, amended in 2011, and 2012 Chapter VI and VII deals with the trial and punishment of offences under this act. Under this act, doctors involved will be punished for a period of 2-5yrs. Ref: FORENSIC MEDICINE AND TOXICOLOGY Dr. PC IGNATIUS PAGE NO: 389

Question: Statuary rape is -
A. Less than 15 years
B. Less than 16 years
C. Less than 18 years
D. Less than 20 years
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ref:Textbook of Forensic medicine and toxicology (V.V.Pillay) 17th edition, page no.388 Minimum age at which female can give consent for sex by what age is 18 years. As per Sec.375IPC unlawful sexual intercourse by man with a woman with or without her consent when she is under 18 years of age. The criminal law (Amendment) Act,2013 has increased the previous recomended age of consent from 16 to 18 years, which means any sexual activity irespective of presence of consent with a woman below the age of 18 will constitute statutory rape.

Question: Punishment for infanticide comes under -
A. IPC102
B. IPC324
C. IPC302
D. IPC300
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ref:Textbook of forensic medicine and toxicology (V.V.Pillay) 17th edition, page no.377 Infanticide refers to the deliberate killings of chlid below the age of one year.In England, Germany, UK, there is a clear-cut distinction between homicide and infanticides. In India, no such distinction exists, and accuse is punished under sec.302IPC,the same manner as in murder.

Question: Palm of one hand is placed horizontally across the mouth and nostrils in
A. Manual strangulation
B. Palmar strangulation
C. Garrotting
D. Mugging
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: palmar strangulation Here the palm of one hand is placed horizontally across the mouth and nostrils, it's pressure being reinforced by placing the other palm on the top of it at right angles, the heel of the palm above pressing upon the front of the neck. Ref: TEXTBOOK OF FORENSIC MEDICINE AND TOXICOLOGY KRISHNAN VIJ FIFTH EDITION PAGE 134

Question: Kunkel's test is done to demonstrate presence of ................. in blood.
A. Lead
B. CuSO4
C. CO
D. Dhatura
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Carbon monoxide (CO)

Question: Not used for iron poison in: FMGE 09; NEET 13
A. Magnesium hydroxide
B. Desferrioxamine
C. Gastric lavage
D. Penicillamine
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ans. Penicillamine

Question: 'Patterned' abrasion is variety of:
A. Linear abrasion
B. Pressure abrasion
C. Sliding abrasion
D. Superficial bruise
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. is 'b' ie pressure abrasion (Ref: Parikh; 6/e, p4.3).An abrasion is a superficial injury involving only the superficial layers of the skin (epidermis only), caused by friction and / or pressure between the skin and some rough object or surface. It bleeds very slightly, heals rapidly in a few days and leaves no scar.They can be classified into 3 types, depending on the manner they are created.ScratchIs a linear injury produced by a sharp object, such as pin, thorn or finger nail.Graze (Sliding, scraping or grinding abrasion).Is produced when a broad surface of skin slides against a rough surface.It is also known as brush or friction burn because it is caused by the frictional force and resembles a burn after dryingIt is commonly found in road traffic accidents.Imprint, Pressure or contact abrasion.Is produced as a result of direct impact or pressure of or contact with some object at right angles to the skin surface.The cuticle is crushed, and the object marks a reproduction of its shape and pattern on the to the skin, therefore it is known as patterned abrasion.Example are ligature marks in hanging and strangulation, nail and thumbs marks in throttling, teeth marks in biting, radiator, grill or tyre mask in vehicular accidents.

Question: Following poisoning retards putrefaction: NEET 13
A. Aluminium phosphide
B. Lead
C. Arsenic
D. Copper
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. Arsenic

Question: Hyoid bone fracture most common occurs in ?
A. Manual strangulation
B. Hanging
C. Smothering
D. Traumatic asphyxia
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. is 'a' i.e., Manual strangulation As manual strangulation (throttling) is among the most violent form of asphyxia, hyoid fracture and other injury to neck structures is more common.

Question: One of the following is the first enzyme to be released at the site of wound?
A. Aminopeptidase
B. ATPase
C. Acid phosphatase
D. Alkaline phosphatase
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ref - Krishan Vij textbook of forensic medicine and toxicology 5e pg - 202

Question: Spanish windlass was practices in Spain as a method of execution. It is a type of:
A. Bansdola
B. Mugging
C. Garrotting
D. Hanging
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Garrotting Garrotting: One of the methods of hemicidal strangulation The victim is attacked from behind without warning and strangled by grasping throat or by throwing a ligature over the neck and tightening it quickly. In this way a single assailant can kill a healthy robust adult. Garrotting was practices as a mode of execution in Spain. Pougal and Turkey. In Spain it was known as `spanish windlass' in which an iron collar around the neck was tightened by a screw for strangling Other common methods of homicidal strangulation are: Throttling - by hand Bansdola - In this type of strangulation the neck is compressed between two sticks of bamboos one in front and other behind the neck. Both the ends are tied with a rope squeezing the victim to the death. Sometimes a single stick is placed across the .front of the neck with a foot on each end of the stick. Mugging - Strangulation is caused by holding the neck of the victim in the bend of the elbow.

Question: Datura seeds resemble -
A. Ricinus communis
B. Capsicum
C. Opium
D. None
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: ↵The seeds of datura closely resemble those of the capsicum universally used over India as a condiment, and the difficulty of their detection is enhanced by the fact that, apart from the bitterness, the poison-seeds have little taste and as impure salt is generally used in India.

Question: Finger print bureau was first established in the following country:
A. India
B. England
C. USA
D. France
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Dactylography or fingerprint system or dermatoglyphics or Galton system was first used in India in 1858, by Sir William Herschel in Bengal. Sir Francis Galton systematised this in 1892. Finger print bureau was first established in Kolkata.Fingerprints are impressions of patterns formed by the papillary or epidermal ridges of the fingeips. Ref: The essentials of forensic medicine and toxicology by Dr K S Narayan Reddy, 27th edition, Page 76.

Question: The post mortem report in case of death in police custody should be recorded as
A. Tape recording
B. Video recording
C. Photographic recording
D. All
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. b (Video recording). (Ref. Parikh, FMT, 5th ed., 130)Installation of video camera in jail and recording of postmortem in case of death in police custody is according to human rights.

Question: During autopsy for virology study which agent is used for storing tissue: NEET 14
A. Sodium chloride
B. Alcohol
C. Rectified spirit
D. 50% glycerine
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ans. 50% glycerine

Question: Caput succedaneum in a newborn is: Karnataka 07
A. Collection of blood under the pericranium
B. Collection of sero-sanguineous fluid in the scalp
C. Edema of the scalp due to grip of the forceps
D. Varicose veins in the scalp
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. Collection of sero-sanguineous fluid in the scalp

Question: An adult male sustained accidental burns and died 1 hour later. Which of the following enzymes will be increased in the burn area?
A. ATPase
B. Aminopeptidase
C. Acid phosphatase
D. Alkaline phosphatase
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Answer: a) ATPase (KS NARAYAN REDDY 33rd ED P-327)In antemortem burns, skin adjacent to the burnt area will show increase in the following enzymes after certain time intervalEnzymeAge of wounds (hour)ATPases1Esterases1Aminopeptidases2Acid phosphatase4Alkaline phosphatase8

Question: CSF is stored at:Kerala 11
A. 4degC
B. -20degC
C. Room temperature
D. -70degC
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. 4degC

Question: Incised wound which is not a feature ?
A. Length is the greatest dimention
B. Width is more than the thickness of the blade
C. Margins are inveed
D. Hesitation cuts are seen in suicidal attempt
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. is 'c' i.e., Margins are inveed Margins are eveed, clear, and clean cut.

Question: Colour of crystals in positive Florence test is -
A. Yellow
B. White
C. Purple
D. Dark Brown
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ref:The essential of forensic medicine and toxicology Dr.K.S NARAYAN REDDY 32nd edition pg no 415 the stain is estracted by 10% HCL and a drop is placed on a glass slide and allow to dry a cover slip is place dover this , and a drop of florence solution(KI,iodide and water) this allowed to run under the cover slip .if the semen is present, dark brown crystals of choline iodide appeared immediately , they are rhombic or needle shaped crystals resembling haemin but are larger, arranged in clusters,rossettes, crosses etc... Choline orginate from the seminal vessicles,the test is not a proof of seminal fluid but only of presence of some vegetables or animal substances . a negative reaction is proof that the stain is not seminal

Question: CAGE questionnaire is used in:AP 07; MP 09; NEET 13
A. Alcohol dependence
B. Opiate poisoning
C. Dhatura poisoning
D. Barbiturate poisoning
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. Alcohol dependence

Question: Cross examination of the prosecution witness is done by-
A. Public prosecutor
B. Defence counsel
C. Judge
D. None
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: In government prosecutions, cross examination is done by defense lawyer.

Question: All are immediate causes of death in burns except
A. Injury
B. Suffocation
C. Toxemia
D. Shock
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Immediate causes of death in burns Shock Suffocation Injury Delayed causes of death Toxemia Inflammatory complications Ref: TEXTBOOK OF FORENSIC MEDICINE AND TOXICOLOGY KRISHNAN VIJ FIFTH EDITION PAGE 163

Question: Which of the following is the Nysten's law
A. Cadaveric rigidity does not appear in hot humid conditions
B. Cadaveric rigidity appears faster in older and the young than in middle age
C. Cadaveric rigidity occurs in men earlier than in woman
D. Cadaveric rigidity affects successively the masticatory muscles, those of the face and the neck, those of the trunk and arms and finally those of lower limbs rruk
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: In rigor mois, all muscles of body, both voluntary and involuntary are involved. Externally it first appears in the eye lids, then lower jaw, muscles of the face, neck upper limbs and lastly lower limbs. This descending pattern or proximodistal progression is called Nysten's law. Ref: FORENSIC MEDICINE AND TOXICOLOGY Dr PC IGNATIUS THIRD EDITION PAGE 26

Question: Fatal period in sulphuric acid poisoning is :
A. 2-4 hours
B. 6-10 hoursd
C. 12-16 hours
D. 8-14 hours
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: C i.e. 12 -16 hours

Question: Presence of spiral grooves in the barrel of weapon is referred to as:
A. Rifling
B. Incendiary
C. Cocking
D. None of the above
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. (A). RiflingShotgunRifled gunCHOKING:* The terminal few cms (7-10) is constricted in shot guns.* Reduces the pelletsdispersionQ* Increases the explosive forces of the pellets.* Increases the velocity of the pellets.RIFLING:* Interior of bore has spiral grooves which run parallel to each other, but twisted spirally from breech to muzzle end.* These grooves are called 'rifling'* Imparts Spinning motion to the bulletQ* Greater power of penetration.* Straight trajectory* Increases accuracy & rangeFully choked shotgun - Least dispersion of pelletsUnchoked shotgun - Maximum dispersionQ of pellets. Paradox gun: A smooth bore gun with small terminal part rifled.Bullets that impart great tissue destruction:Soft nosed bullet that flatten on impactDum Dum bulletBullets that fragment (frangible bullet)Bullets that mushroom on impact

Question: Autopsy is known by all names except ?
A. Obduction
B. Necropsy
C. Biopsy
D. Postmoem examination
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. is 'c' i.e., Biopsy An autopsy (also known as a post-moem examination, obduction, necropsy, or autopsia cadaverum) is a highly specialized surgical procedure that consists of a thorough examination of a corpse by dissection to determine the cause and manner of death and to evaluate any disease or injury that may be present.

Question: Most useful for sex determination is: Kerala 08
A. Skull
B. Femur
C. Pelvis
D. Tibia
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. Pelvis

Question: Which type of cattle poisoning occurs due to ingestion of LINSEED plant?
A. Aconite
B. Atropine
C. Pilocarpine
D. Hydrocyanic acid
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Hydrocyanic acid is also used as cattle poison. Cattle poisoning has been known to occur from eating linseed plant because of the natural development of a cyanogenic glycoside which may liberate hydrocyanic acid. Ref: Essentials of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology By Dr K S Narayan Reddy, 27th Edition, Pages 559-60

Question: All are synonyms for PM staining seen in dependant pas of the body during postmoem, except: PGI 13
A. Cadaveric lividity
B. Suggilation
C. Livor mois
D. Algor mois
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ans. Algor mois

Question: Grievous hurt is defined under:
A. 320IPC
B. 318 IPC
C. 321 IPC
D. 375 IPC
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans: a (320 IPC) Ref: Reddy, 21st ed, p. 244Grievous hurt is defined under IPC 320Some important IPC'sIPC 375 - definition of rapeIPC 376 - punishment of rapeIPC 320 - definition of grievous heartIPC 84 - deals with the criminal responsibility of insaneIPC304A - deals with criminal negligenceIPC 304B - dowry deathIPC 300 - defines murderIPC 299 - defines culpable homicideIPC 302 - punishment of murderIPC 304 - punishment of culpable homicide

Question: Rigor moritis devolops ..... after death :
A. 1/2-1 hrs
B. 1-2 hrs
C. 3-6 hrs
D. 12 hrs
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: B i.e. 1 - 2 hours

Question: Sacrum becomes a single bone at ___ years of age.:-
A. 15
B. 25
C. 30
D. 40
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Sacrum The five sacral veebrae are separated by cailage until pubey. Later, fusion of epiphyses takes place and ossification of interveebral discs extend from below upwards. Sacrum becomes single bone at 21-25 years of age. Sometimes, it leaves a gap between S1 and S2, until 32 years called as 'lapsed union'.

Question: Judge can ask questions: Punjab 07
A. During cross-examination
B. Examination-in-Chief
C. Any time during trial
D. Re-examination
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. Any time during trial

Question: Which is not an aryl phosphate -
A. Parathion
B. TIK-20
C. Malathion
D. Paraoxon
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Organophosphate poisoning is the most common poisoning in India followed by aluminium phosphide. Organophosphorus compounds are classified as 1. Alkyl compounds -- such as tetraethyl pyrophosphate (TEPP), hexa ethyl tetraphosphate (HETP), octa methyl pyrophosphate (OMPA), malathion etc. 2. Aryl compounds -- such as parathion, chlorothion, diazinon (Tik-20), paraoxon etc. REF;THE SYNOPSIS OF FORENSIC MEDICINE:KS NARAYANA REDDY;28th EDITION;PAGE NO 291

Question: After the death of the 78 years old male patient in a hospital , who was suffering from COPD. His relatives entered the hospital with heavy sharp weapons and damaged the hospital propey and stared abusing and beating the doctor as well as his staff, Violence against a medical practitioner is considered as:
A. Non-cognizable and non-bailable offense
B. Non-cognizable and bailable offense
C. Cognizable and bailable offense
D. Cognizable and non-bailable offense
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Medical protection act: The Act, covering doctors affiliated to institutions as well as independent practitioners, outlaws attacks against physicians and damage to their propey. Offenders can get a jail term of up to 3 years and a fine of Rs 50,000. As per the medicare service persons and damage to propey in medicare service institutions (Prevention of violence and damage or loss to propey) Act , Violence against a registered medical practitioner is considered as a cognizable and non-bialable offence.

Question: Monozygotic twins do not have same-
A. Fingerprints
B. Genetic make up
C. Facial appearance
D. Stature
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. is "a' i.e., Fingerprints o Monozygotic twins are a result of the division of the single fertilized egg into two embryos. Thus, they have exactly identical DNA, except for the generally undetectable micromutations that begin as soon as the cell starts dividing.o Fingerprints of the identical twins start their development from the same DNA so they show considerable genetic similarity.o However identical twins are situated in different parts of the womb during development, so each fetus encounters slightly different intrauterine forces than their siblings.o As a result fingerprints of the identical twins have different microdetails which can be used for identification purposes.

Question: Macewan's sign is seen in:
A. Cyanide poisoning
B. Alcoholism
C. Lead
D. Arsenic poison
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Alcoholism

Question: A child brought to casualty with reports of violent shaking by parents. The most likely injury is?
A. Long bone fracture
B. Ruptured spleen
C. Subdural haematoma
D. Skull bone fracture
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Violent shaking (by parent) may cause subdural hematoma; whereas ruptured spleen occurs due to compression of abdomen; long bone fracture due to compression, bending, direct blow, pulling and twisting; and skull fractures due to direct blow.
Caffey (1974) described the effects of shaking as a major cause of subdural haematoma and intraocular bleeding in battered babies or infantile whiplash syndrome.

Question: 21st tooth erupts at:-
A. 6 years
B. 8 years
C. 10 years
D. 12 years
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Eruption is defined as the superior pa of crown of the tooth appearing level with the surface of the alveolar bone.Temporary dentition: total 20 number of teeth, stas at 6 months till 2 years.Permanent dentition: total 32 number of teeth, stas at 6 years completed by 17 - 25 years.1st to erupt is molar 1 (M1) and last to erupt is molar 3 (M3).21st teeth refers to 1st permanent tooth, which erupts at 6 years.

Question: Father of modern toxicology -
A. Paracelsus
B. Galton
C. Orfila
D. Guftason
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: orfila is known as father of modern toxicology Ref: FORENSIC MEDICINE AND TOXICOLOGY Dr PC IGNATIUS THIRD EDITION PAGE 397

Question: 5-year-old male brought to casualty by his mother because of episode of sudden vomiting. He has been behaving strangely according to mother. Laboratory findings showed microcytic hypochromic anemia with the above finding. The most probable poisoning is:
A. Chronic arsenic poisoning
B. Chronic lead poisoning
C. Chronic mercury poisoning
D. Chronic copper poisoning
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. (B). Chronic lead poisoningThe above blood picture shows basophilic stippling of RBCs.Basophilic stippling (dots in the red blood cells) is due to the inhibition of 5 pyrimidine nucleotidase enzyme resulting in aggregation of ribosomes.Other findings in blood: Microcytic hypochromic anemia, anisocytosis, poikilocytosisBasophilic stippling is also seen in megaloblastic anemia.

Question: Twin pregnancy, but due to two different men is called: NEET 14
A. Superfetation
B. Superfecundation
C. Both of the above
D. None
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. Superfecundation

Question: Rigor mois not seen in: AIIMS 13
A. Fetus < 7 months of age
B. Full term fetus
C. Elderly
D. Anemic person
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. Fetus < 7 months of age

Question: Hostile witness is covered under IPC section
A. 191
B. 192
C. 193
D. 194
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Sec 191 IPC states that whoever, being legally bound by an oath or by an express provision of law to state the truth, or being bound by law to make a declaration upon any subject, makes any statement which is false, and which he either knows or believes to be false or does not believe to be true, is said to give false evidence. This is a hostile witness. REF: Dr K. S. Narayan Reddys Synopsis of Forensic Medicine & Toxicology 29th edition pg. 31.

Question: Most specific test for organophosphorous poisoning is:
A. RBC cholinesterase level
B. Plasma cholinestrase level
C. RBC uroporphyrin level
D. Measurment of serum level of organophosphorous
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: B i.e. Plasma cholinesterase level

Question: Cribriform hymen is seen -
A. Post paum
B. Septate hymen
C. Sieve hymen
D. Virgin
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ref: Textbook of Forensic medicine and toxicology (V.V.Pillay) 17th edition, page no.354 Hymen is a thin fold of connective tissue, covered by mucous membranes, about 1 mm in overall thickness, situated at the vaginal orifice. They are of different types. cribriform is one of them, characterized by many small holes. As a result of sexual intercourse, hymen is usually tornfrom posteriorly, with unilateral or bilateral tears extending to the point of its attachment to the vaginal wall. So presence of hymen most probably indicate virginity.

Question: Magnan's symptom is seen in:
A. Datura
B. Cocaine
C. Opium
D. Cannabis
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Altered tactile sensation: the person feel that some insects are crawling on his skin. This is known asMagnan's symptomorcocaine bugs(formication). Cocaine is an alkaloid derived from plantErythroxylon coca.

Question: "La-facies sympathique" is a condition seen in cases of
A. Hanging
B. Strangulation
C. Myocardial insufficiency
D. Railway accidents
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: * La facies sympathique occurs in hanging* On postmortem examination, in hanging, usually the eyes are closed or partly open and the pupils are usually dilated.Sometimes, when the ligature knot presses on the cervical sympathetic, the eye on the same side may remain open and its pupil dilated (La, facies sympathiaue). This indicates antemortem hanging.

Question: Which poisoning causes 'pink disease'?
A. Arsenic
B. Mercury
C. Copper
D. Lead
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. is 'b' i.e. Mercury Pink disease or Acrodvniao It is thought to be an idiosyncratic hypersensitivity reaction particularly seen in children. This can be caused by chronic mercury exposure in any form usually in children. The onset is insidious with anorexia, insomnia, sweating, skin rash and photophobia. Hands and feet become puffy, pinkish, painful, paraesthetic with peeling of skin (5Ps). Teeth may be shed.

Question: Mooning is a form of
A. Exhibitionism
B. Transvestism
C. Voyeurism
D. Eonism
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Flashing: The act of momentarily exposing or revealing sexual body pa by quickly moving the clothing. Streaking: The act of running naked through a public place. Mooning: The act of displaying one's bare buttocks, by lowering the pants and bending over

Question: Crural index is:
A. Length of tibia/femur x 100
B. Length of radius/humerus x 100
C. Length of fibula/tibia x 100
D. Length of radius/ulna x 100
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. Length of tibia/femur x 100

Question: Which of the following factor determines the destructive power of bullet after firing?
A. Weight of bullet
B. Shape of bullet
C. Size of bullet
D. Velocity of bullet
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: A bullet's ability to injure is directly related to its kinetic energy at the moment of impact. Kinetic energy i.e. E = mv2 /2 The kinetic energy is directly propoional to weight (mass) of the bullet and the square of its velocity. Thus a bullet traveling at twice the speed of a second bullet of equal weight and similar size and shape, possesses four times much energy and injuring power. Ref: The Essentials of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology by Narayan Reddy, 27th edition, Page 189.

Question: Bullet that leaves a visible mark in its flight so that person can see the path is
A. Tandem bullet
B. Tracer bullet
C. Dum-dum bullet
D. Incendiary bullet
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Tracer bullet: It leaves a visible mark or 'trace' while in flight, so that the path of bullet can be seen . Dum - dum bullet: The nose of the bullet is not covered by jacket & exposed. It expands or mushrooms on striking the target, producing a large hole & more damage. Incendiary bullets: Incendiary bullets contain phosphorus. Type of army bullet used to cause fire in the target. Tandem bullet: Bullets ejected one after the other, when the first bullet having been struck in the barrel fails to leave the barrel and is ejected by a subsequently fired bullet.

Question: Of the following which does not categorise under Rape? Sexual intercourse with :
A. Wife below 15 years
B. Wife above 15 years
C. Women below 16 years
D. Women above 20 years
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: B i.e. Wife above 20

Question: Fracture of the hyoid bone results from all except :
A. Throttling
B. Hanging
C. Choking
D. Ligature strangulation
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: C i.e. Choking - Burking is a method of homicidal smothering and traumatic asphyxiaQ. In smothering lips, gums, tongue, inner side of mouth & nose may show bruising or lacerationQ. Asphyxial signs (eg congestion, cynosis & patechiae) are severe except when the head & face is enclosed in plastic bag. In smothering, choking, gagging, there is no fracture of hyoid bone, because in these throat (neck) is not touched.

Question: Best prognostic indicator for head injured patients: AIIMS 10
A. GCS
B. CT findings
C. Age of the patient
D. History
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. GCS

Question: Ghotna is:-
A. Heavy wooden log rolled on leg
B. Compressing the thighs with two roads
C. Tying the limps to the pole
D. Electric shock to genitalia
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ghotna: Rolling a wooden log over the thighs up and down, while the log is weighed by one or two policemen standing on it Cattle prod: Electric shock especially over the genitals Sham execution: Victim is blind folded and asked to stand before a wall and then threatened that a vehicle is going to hit him. He hears the sound of a vehicle very near to him, causing fear and shock.

Question: In Breslau's second life test, organ tested is
A. Brain
B. Hea
C. Lung
D. Stomach and Intestine
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: D i.e. Stomach & Intestine Breslau's second life (or Stomach Bowel) test says that air will be swallowed & so may pass into stomach & small intestine when respiration establishes.

Question: IPC 193 is for -
A. Perjury
B. Punishment for perjury
C. Issuing false certificate
D. Causing disappearance of evidence
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. is 'b' i.e., Punishment for perjury Perjury, Hostile witness and false certificate* 191 IPC: (i) Giving false evidence (perjury) under oath and (ii) hostile witness.* 192 IPC: Fabricating false evidence (perjury).* 193 IPC: Punishment for false evidence (punishment for perjury): imprisonment upto 7 years + fine.* 194 IPC: Giving or fabricating false evidence to procure conviction of capital offence.* 195 IPC: Giving or fabricating false evidence to procure conviction of offence punishable with imprisonment for life.* 197 IPC: Issuing or signing (attesting) false certificate by a doctor is a criminal offence.* 201 IPC: Causing disappearance of evidence.

Question: Causing hu by means of poison, etc with an intent to commit an offence is punishable under
A. Sec. 328 IPC
B. Sec.326 A IPC
C. Sec.327 IPC
D. Sec. 329 IPC
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: - Sec. 328 IPC - Causing hu by means of poison, etc with an intent to commit an offence shall be Punishment is imprisonment upto 10 years and also fine. - Sec.326 A IPC - voluntarily causing grievous hu by means of acid - Sec.327 IPC - voluntarily causing hu to exto propey - Sec. 329 IPC - voluntarily causing grievous hu to exto propey

Question: The medicolegal impoance of postmoem lividity is all except - (UP 07)
A. Cause of death elsewhere
B. Time since death
C. Manner of death
D. Position of the body at the death
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: The postmoem hypostasis helps to estimate time since death with its extent, is a sign of death, posture and moving of body at death by its fixation. Cause of death can be determined from its colour. Dr.Narayana Reddys Synopsis of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 27th edition pg. 78.

Question: All are Narcotic drug as per NDPS (National Drug Psychotropic Substances Act) EXCEPT:
A. Marijuana
B. Ketamine
C. Cannabis
D. Heroine
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: ANSWER:(B)KetamineREF: Textbook Of Forensic Medicine And Toxicology: Principles And Practice By Vij 4th ed page 566, style="font-size: 1.04761904761905em; font-family: Times New Roman, Times, serif; margin: 0 0 0 8px; text-indent: 0; text-align: left">The Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances (NDPS) Act, 1985 was framed taking into account India's obligations under the three UN drug Conventions as well as Article 47 of the Constitution which mandates that the 'State shall endeavour to bring about prohibition of the consumption except for medicinal purposes of intoxicating drinks and of drugs which are injurious to health'NARCOTIC DRUGSCoca Leaf & derivatives(a) Crude cocaine(b) Ecgonine and derivatives(c) Cocaine, that is, methyl ester of benzoyl-ecgonine and its salts(d) All preparations containing more than 0.1 per cent, of cocaineCanabis (Hemp): (AKA - Cannabis indica/ Indian hemp/Hashish in Egypt/Marijuana in America/Dagga in Africa)(a) Charas/Hashish- resinous exudates of leaves & stem- 25 to 40% THC(b) Ganja - flowering top- 25% THC(c) Any mixture, with or without any neutral material, of any of the above forms of cannabis or cannabisOpium and derivatives(a) Poppy seed: Seeds of Papaver sominiferum are called the poppy seeds while the latex which oozes out and dries is called the opium gum(b) Poppy straw: As per the NDPS Act, poppy straiv means 'all parts of the plant of opium poppy except seeds'(c) Opium derivative means: medicinal opium, phenanthrene alkaloids namely, morphine, codeine, thebaine and their salts, diacetylmorphine (Heroin), that is, the alkaloid also known as diamorphine or heroin and its salts, all preparations containing more than 0.2 per cent, of morphine or containing any diacetylmorphine and their salts, preparations, admixtures, extracts and other substances containing any of these drugs.(II) Psychotropic substances: "psychotropic substance" means any substance, natural or synthetic, or any natural material or any salt or preparation of such substance or material included in the list of psychotropic substances specified in the Schedule. E.g. Amphetamines, LSD, Barbiturates, Alprazolam, Benzodiadepines, Ergotamine, Ephedrine, Methyl ethyl ketone (MEK) etc.Note:* Essential narcotic drug means a narcotic drug notified by the Central Government for medical and scientific use (Morphine, Fentanyi and Methadone)* Bhang is a preparation made from cannabis leaves consumed in parts of India on some festivals. As it is not made from cannabis resin or from flowering tops, it is not covered under the NDPSAct, 1985.

Question: Disulfiram-like reaction is caused by: Kerala 11
A. Acamprostate
B. Metronidazole
C. Tetracycline
D. Digitalis
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. Metronidazole

Question: Botulinum toxin is used for the treatment of: DNB 08
A. Blepharospasm
B. Risus sardonicus
C. Strabismus
D. All
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ans. All

Question: Antemortem and postmortem wounds could be differentiated by all, except -
A. Everted margins
B. Blood clots in surrounding
C. Swollen edges
D. Sharp edges
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Antemortem wound shows gaping, everted and swollen edges with vital reactions of inflammation, infection and healing.
It bleeds freely and shows extensive, deep and firmly adherent clotting (staining) of surrounding tissue which can't be washed away.

Question: In embalmingr solution is given through ?
A. Veins
B. Aeries
C. Lymphatics
D. none of above
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Emblamings may be aerial emblaming and cavity emblaming.

Question: After postmoem body is handed over to :
A. The authority who has conducted inquest in that paicular case
B. Police station near by
C. Coroner
D. Chief magistrate
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: A i.e. The authority who has conducted inquest in that paicular case

Question: Which of these following is an example of a leading question?
A. How did you get cuts on T shi
B. Cause of injury
C. Whether it is caused by knife
D. Size of incised wound
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Leading question: Any question suggesting the answer which the person putting it wishes or expects to receive. It includes a material fact and admits of a conclusive answer by a simple 'Yes' or 'No' Leading questions not permitted in Leading questions permitted in -Examination in chief(Section 142 IEA) -Re-examination -Dying declaration -Cross examination( Section 143 IEA) -Dying deposition -Hostile witness

Question: The first permanent tooth to appear is:
A. 1st molar
B. Lateral incisor
C. Upper canine
D. 1st premolar
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans: A (1st molar) Ref: The Essentials of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology by KS Narayan Reddy. 29th edition. 2010.Explanation:Appearance of temporary teeth:Lower central incisor (6 mths)Upper central incisor (7 M)Upper lateral incisor (8 M)Lower lateral incisor (9 M)1 st molar ( 1 yr)Canine (1 1/2 yr)2nd molar (2 yr)Appearance of permanent teeth:1st molar (6 yr)Central incisors (7 yr)Lateral incisors (8 yr)1st premolar (9 vr)2nd premolar (10 yr)Canine (11 yr)2nd molar (12-14 yr)3rd molar (17-25 yr)

Question: What is the characteristic of a lacerated wound over bony surface due to blunt trauma without excessive skin crushing?
A. Irregular margins
B. Regular sharp margins
C. Tearing
D. Flaying
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Blunt force on areas where the skin is close to bone, and the subcutaneous tissues are scanty, may produce a wound which by linear splitting of the tissues, may look like incised wound. Lacerations produced without excessive skin crushing may have relatively regular sharp margins. Ref: The Essentials of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology by Dr. K. S. Narayan Reddy, 27th edition, Page 166.

Question: Mechanism of action of cyanide poisoning:September 2010
A. Inhibits protein breakdown
B. Inhibits DNA synthesis
C. Inhibits protein syntheisi
D. Blocks Cytochrome enzyme P- 450
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ans. D: Blocks Cytochrome enzyme P- 450Cyanide poisoning occurs when a living organism is exposed to a compound that produces cyanide ions (CN-) when dissolved in water. Common poisonous cyanide compounds include hydrogen cyanide gas and the crystalline solids potassium cyanide and sodium cyanide.The cyanide ion halts cellular respiration by inhibiting an enzyme in mitochondria called cytochrome c oxidase.

Question: IPC 82 states that: child cannot be punished under what age -
A. 5yrs
B. 8yrs
C. 7yrs
D. lOyrs
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. is 'c' i.e., 7yrs o Section 82 I.P.C.: Criminal responsibility is any act which is done by a child under seven years of age is not an offence.Section of IPCRelated with82A child under the age of seven is incapable of committing an offence. This is so because action alobe does not amount to guilt unless if is accompanied by a guilty mind. And, a child of that tender age cannot have a guilty mind or criminal intention with which the act is done. This presumption, however, is only confined to offenses under the IPC but not to other Acts, e.g., the Railway Act.83A child above seven and under twelve years of age is presumed to be capable of committing an offence it he has obtained sufficient maturity to understand and judge the nature and consequences of his conduct on that occasion. The law presumes such maturity' in a child of that age unless the contrary is proved by the defence.89A child under 12 years of age cannot give valid consent to suffer any harm which can occur from an act done in good faith and for its benefit, e.g., a consent for an operation. Only, a guardian can give such consent.87A person under 12 years of age cannot give valid consent, whether express or implied, to suffer any harm which may result from an act no intended or not known to cause death or grievous hurt e.g. consent for a wrestling contest.84Nothing is an offence which is done by a person who at the time of doing it, by reason of unsoundness of mind, is uncapable of knowing the nature of act (i.e. it is wrong or contrary to law).85,86Drunkness and criminal responsibilityQ

Question: In a dead body recovered from an open field, the below finding is seen. What could be the time since death:
A. 24- 36 hrs
B. 3- 5 days
C. 5-10 days
D. More than 2 weeks
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. (B). 3 - 5 daysPeeling of skin is a sign of decomposition.Skin slippage is noted on 2 -3 days,Degloving & destocking type of peeling -3-5 days.This type of change is also seen in drowning.The degloved skin can be preserved in formalin and used for fingerprint analysis.

Question: Alcohol anti-craving agents are all, except: AIIMS 09
A. Lorazepam
B. Clonidine
C. Acamprosate
D. Naltrexone
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. Lorazepam

Question: An order for exhumation can be given by: Maharashtra 08
A. District collector
B. Additional district magistrate
C. Sub-collector
D. Any of the above
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ans. Any of the above

Question: A factory worker presents with excessive salivation, blue lines on gums, tremors, disturbed personality, insomnia, and loss of appetite. The most likely poisoning is -
A. Mercury
B. Lead
C. Arsenic
D. Phosphorus
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Excessive salivation, blue line on gums, tremors (i.e. Hatter's shake), disturbed personality (i.e. erethism) and loss of appetite (anorexia) suggest the diagnosis of mercury poisoning.

Question: One gram of smokeless gunpowder produces: Karnataka 11
A. 3000-4000 cc of gas
B. 9000-10,000 cc of gas
C. 12,000-13,000 cc of gas
D. 15,000-16,000 cc of gas
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. 12,000-13,000 cc of gas

Question: Emphysema aquosum is associated with?
A. Dry drowning
B. Wet drowning
C. Immersion syndrome
D. Secondary drowning
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Emphysema aquosum is a sign of wet drowning. Drowning fluid actually penetrates alveolar walls to enter the tissues and the blood vessels. This has been described as emphysema aquosum. Cause of death in wet drowning: Disruption of pulmonary surfactant Dry drowning: Water does not enter the lungs, but death results from: Immediate sustained laryngeal spasm Cardiac arrest due to vagal inhibition

Question: Falanga is -
A. Suspension by wrist
B. Beating of feet
C. Placing electric wires in vagina
D. Clamping of thighs between bamboos
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. is 'b' i.e., Beating of feet * Beating may be of following types -i) Falanga (Falolka/Baatinada) : Beating of soles of feet with blunt object.ii) Telefono : Simultaneous beating of both ears with palms.iii) Quirofana : Beating on abdomen while upper half of body lying unsupported on table.

Question: Murder is.............. offence.
A. Cognizable, non-compoundable and non-bailable
B. Cognizable, compoundable and bailable
C. Non-cognizable, non-compoundable and non-bailable
D. Non-cognizable, compoundable and bailable
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans: (a) Cognizable, non-compoundable and non-bailableRef: The First Schedule, Classification of Offences, Indian Penal CodeCognizable offencesCognizable offences are more serious crimes wherein police can arrest the suspect without any warrant.Ex. rape, murder, ragging, dowry death etc.Compoundable offencesCompoundable offences are those offences where, the complainant (one who has filed the case, i.e., the victim), enter into a compromise and agrees to have the charges dropped against the accused.Bailable offencesBailable offences are less serious crimes wherein the suspect can be released from custody by furnishing a bond on bail.

Question: A triphasic withdrawal syndrome follows an abrupt discontinuation of ______ use.
A. Alcohol
B. LSD
C. Heroin
D. Cocaine
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Cocaine use produces a mild physical, but a strong psychic dependence. A triphasic withdrawal syndrome follows an abrupt discontinuation of chronic cocaine use. Signs and symptoms : In the early phase (crash phase, 9 h to 4 days), there is anorexia, depression, agitation, excessive craving, hypersomnia, fatigue and exhaustion which is followed by normal mood, anxiety and anhedonia (next 4-7 days). In third phase (extinction phase, after 7-10 days), there are no withdrawal symptoms, but increased vulnerability to relapse. Treatment : Bromocriptine and amantadine are useful in reducing cocaine craving. Gabapentin is being used in adult addicts.

Question: Mydriasis is/are caused by:
A. Homer syndrome
B. Neurosyphilis
C. Organophosphorus poisoning
D. Atropine
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: D i.e. Atropine Pinpoint pupils are seen in - 'Car Chlor Or Mor' i.e. Carbolic acid, Chloral hydrate, Organophosphorus, Morphine (opiate)Q and 'New Horn' i.e. neurosyphilis/tabes dorsalis (spinal miosis or small, irregular Argyll Robeson pupil) and Horner's syndrome. Atropine and cocaine cause mydriasisQ Barbiturate poisoning 1/t constricted & reacting pupils which dilate during terminal asphyxiaQ

Question: Copper sulfate poisoning manifests with
A. High anion gap acidosis
B. Rhabdomyolysis
C. Acute hemolysis
D. Peripheral neuropathy
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: COPPER Poisonous Compounds: (1) Copper sulphate (blue vitriol) occurs in large, blue crystals. (2) Copper subacetate (verdigris), occurs in bluish-green masses or powder. Signs and Symptoms: Increased salivation, burning pain in the stomach with colicky abdominal pain, thirst, nausea, eructations and repeated vomiting. The vomited matter is blue or green. There is diarrhoea with much straining; motions are liquid and brown but not bloody. Oliguria, haematuria, albuminuria, acidosis and uraemia may occur. In severe cases haemolysis,haemoglobinuria, methaemoglobinaemia, jaundice, pancreatitis and cramps of legs or spasms and convulsions occur. The breathing is difficult, cold perspiration and severe headache occur. In some cases, paralysis of limbs is followed by drowsiness, insensibility, coma and death due to shock. Later deaths occur due to hepatic or renal failure or both. Ref:- k s narayan reddy; pg num:-547

Question: Reinsch test is used in diagnosis of poisoning due to: UP 11; COMEDK 12
A. Arsenic
B. Lead
C. Iron
D. Copper sulphate
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. Arsenic

Question: Black gun pow der composition -
A. Charcoal 60% + Potassium nitrate 20% + sulphur 20%
B. Charcoal 25% + Potassium nitrate 70% + sulphur 05%
C. Charcoal 15% + Potassium nitrate 75% +- sulphur 10%
D. Charcoal 65% +Potassium nitrate 20% + sulphur 15%
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. is 'c' i.e., Charcoal 15% + Potassium nitrate 75% + sulphur 10% The classical gun powder is known as black powder, consists of charcol (15%), Sulphur (10%), and potassium nitrate (75%). Depending on fineness, the black gun powder is designated as FG, FFG, FFFG. etc. (F = fineness). Pyrodex is another gun powder with same components, but with different ratios.Black gun powder produces smoke, i.e. It is smoke producing pow der. Smokeless powder, in addition to black powder, has nitrocellulose (single base), or nitrocellulose plus nitroglycerine (double base), or nitrocellulose plus nitroglycerine plus nitroguanidine (triple base). Semi smokeless pow der has 80% black pow der and 20% smokeless powder (nitrocellulose).

Question: In starvation, the gall bladder may be -
A. Atrophied
B. Distended
C. Show stones
D. Normal
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: PM appearance in death due to starvation

Complete disappearance of body fat.
Loss of mesenteric and omental fat, atrophic digestive tract, empty stomach no wider than colon, thin and transparent small intestine.
Distension of gallbladder due to the accumulation of bile from lack of stimulation.

Question: Blanket consent is consent taken: NEET 14
A. When the patient comes to doctor for treatment
B. Orally when given during any procedure
C. Implied by gesture
D. At the time of admission to do any surgery
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ans. At the time of admission to do any surgery

Question: A case of suspected homicide comes to a doctor. He is supposed to inform police under section of CrPC:
A. 37
B. 39
C. 174
D. 176
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. b. 39 `Section 39 of CrPC gives a list of offences, the information regarding which is to be mandatorily provided to the police. That is, the doctor is duty bound to provide information about these enlisted offences (in Sec 39 CrPC) to the police.' Impoant Criminal Procedure Codes (CrPC) CrPC Description 39 Doctor is duty bound to provide information about enlisted offences to the policeQ 53 Examination of accused by medical practitioner at request of policeQ 53A Examination of accused of rapeQ 54 Examination of arrested person by medical officer at request of arrested personQ 61 Format of summonsQ 62 Summons how servedQ 70 Form of warrant of arrest and durationQ 174 Police inquestQ 176 Magistrates inquestQ 293 Exception to oral evidenceQ 327 Open trial-closed roomIn camera trial-rape casesQ

