Question: Abnormal vascular patterns seen with colposcopy in case of cervical intraepithelial neoplasia  are all except
A. Punctation
B. Mosaicism
C. Satellite lesions
D. Atypical vessels
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Abnormal vascular pattern include punctation, mosaicism and atypical vessels.

Question: Regarding vaginal candidiasis which one of the following is false:
A. Cottage cheese like secretions are seen
B. Intense pruritus
C. Most common in non-pregnant women
D. Buds and hyphae seen in KOH preparation
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. C. Most common in non-pregnant womenCandidiasis is caused by Candida albinism which thrives in an acidic medium with an abundant supply of carbohydrates. It is found commonly in pregnancy, and in patients on oral contraceptives, antibiotics and. corticosteroids. It is also seen in patients with diabetes. It causes a profuse discharge and intense pruritus with soreness of vagina and dysuria. Vagina and vulva are edematous and excoriated and the white patches of cheesy material on the vagina and vulva can be easily identified. A 10%KOH smear shows the buds and hyphae of the Candida organism. Nystatin or ketoconazole vaginal tablets used for one week are curative when used along with a cream of the same medication for External use.

Question: Which of the following is the best procedure done for intrapaum fetal monitoring:
A. Fetal echocardiography
B. Fetal scalp pH
C. Continuous electrical fetal hea monitoring
D. Physical examination
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Electrical Fetal hea monitoring is useful as: (1) Provides accurate information, (2) Helpful in diagnosing fetal distress, (3) Directs about intervention to prevent fetal death or morbidity, (4) It is superior to intermittent monitoring methods.

Question: Savita is 32 weeks pregnant presents in causality and diagnosed as a case of APH. Vitals are unstable with BP 80/60 which of the following is next step in M/n
A. Careful observation
B. Blood transfusion
C. Medical induction of labour
D. Immediate cesarean section
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. is b i.e. Blood transfusion

Question: Sho structured primi gravida has height less then
A. 140 cm
B. 145 cm
C. 150 cm
D. 135 cm
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: 140 cm

Question: Which of these is the most impoant indication for Strassmans Metroplasty done for a bicornuate uterus?
A. Infeility
B. Menorrhagia
C. Repeated early pregnancy losses
D. Associated vaginal atresia
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Habitual aboion is the most impoant indication for surgical treatment of women who have a double uterus. The aboion rate in women who have a double uterus is to three times greater than that of the general population. Best diagnosis of the condition is made by laparohysteroscopy. Strassmans Metroplasty

Question: Patient diagnosed as squamous cell intraepithelial lesion which of the following has the highest risk for progression to carcinoma;
A. Low grade squamous intraepithelial neoplasia
B. High grade squamous intraepithelial neoplasia
C. Squamous intraepithelial associated with HPV 16
D. Squamous intraepithelial neoplasia associated with HIV
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: High grade squamous intraepithelial lesion have a propensity to progress and become invasive, therefore need investigations and treatment Ref: Shaw Gynecology 17 e pg 410.

Question: After delivery, a 28 year old pre ecclamptic primigra has a soft uterus with moderate-to-heavy bleeding. There is no laceration and there is PPH diagnosed due to uterine atony. Which of the following is the best management option?
A. 0.2-mg intramuscular (IM) ergonovine (Methergine)
B. 20 units of IV oxytocin
C. 10 units of oral oxytocin
D. 250 mg prostaglandin F2-alpha orally
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ergot derivatives should not be given in patients with hypeension since this is classically known to increase blood pressure. A high BP may provoke a post paum ecclampsia Oxytocin is not orally effective . Prostaglandin F2-alpha is given IM.

Question: What is monitored in a patient of Pre eclamsia ?
A. Uric acid
B. Platlet count
C. LFT
D. All of the above
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ans. is 'd' i.e. All of the abov Investigations in a case of Pre eclampsia* URINE for proteins/albumin. 24 hours urine protein* CBC: There is hemoconcentration so HB values are false elevated. Low platlets indicate HELLP syndrome* Sr uric acid: It is a biochemical marker of preeclampsia. Raised levels (>4.5 mg/dl) indicate renal involvement and also correlate with severity of preeclampsia, volume contraction and fetal jeopardy.* LFT: SGOT, SGPT, Bilirubin* RFT: Sr creatinine* Coagulation profile may be required in severe cases:i) BTii) CTiii) PT, APTTiv) Fibrinogen levelsv) FDP

Question: A obese female having hirsutism on laboratory investigation has high level of LH and androgens. Likely cause is-
A. PCOS
B. Exogenous steroid ingestion
C. Turner syndrome
D. Kleinfelter syndrome
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. is 'a' i.e., PCOS o The clinical and laboratory features of the patient described in the question match with those of PCOS as depicted in the table. So the most appropriate answer is PCOS.Clinical features of polycystic ovarian diseaseClinical featureHannonalSequelaeo Young womano | E2. levelo Diabaetes (15%)o Central obesityo | FSH | LH > 10 IU/mlo CVS disorder# SMI > 30kg/cm2o | FSK/LH ratioo Lipidaemia# Waist line > 35o | Androgenso Hypertensiono Gligomenorrhoea, amenorrhoeao Testosterone,epiandrostenedione. |dehydropepiandrosterone |o Endometrial cancero Infertility (20%)o Breast cancero Hirsutismo Premature ovariano Acanthosis nigra due to insulin resistance, Thick pigmented skin over the nape of neck, inner thigh and axillao 17-alpha-hvdroxy progesterone> 800 ng.'dLfailure following surgeryo Testosterone > 2 ng/mlo Most androgens from ovaryo | fasting insulin > l0mlu/Lo Protactin |o Sex hormone binding globulin (SHBG)o | E2/oestrone (E1) ratioo F glucose,'insulin ratio <4-5 (normal 2-4-4-5)

Question: Length of umbilical cord is?
A. 40-50 cms
B. 60- 120 cms
C. 30-100 cms
D. 25-40 cms
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: ANSWER: (C) 30-100 cmsREF: Dutta 6th ed p. 40The normal length of umblical cord is around 50cms with usual variation between 30-100 cms

Question: The protective bacterium in the normal vagina is:
A. Peptostreptococcus
B. Lactobacillus
C. Gardenella vaginalis
D. E. coli
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Vagina has inhabitant bacteria called as Doderleins bacteria which is a lactobaccilli, and converts the glycogen present in vaginal epithelium into lactic acid.
Thus, pH of the vagina is acidic
The pH of the vagina in an adult woman is 4 -5.5 with an average of 4.5.
The pH of vagina varies with age — for further details see preceding text.

Question: Ulipristal acetate is a/an:
A. GnRH agonist
B. Androgen antagonist
C. Selective estrogen receptor modulator
D. Selective progesterone receptor modulator
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ans. is d, i.e. Selective progesterone receptor modulatorRef: Harrison's Principles of Internal medicine 19th/ed, p2391Ulipristal acetate (trade name Ella One in the European Union, Ella in the US for contraception, and Esmya for uterine fibroid) is a selective progesterone receptor modulator (SPRM).PharmacodynamicsAs an SPRM, ulipristal acetate has partial agonistic as well as antagonistic effects on the progesterone receptor. It also binds to the glucocorticoid receptor, but is only a weak anti-glucocorticoid relative to mifepristone, and has no relevant affinity to the estrogen, androgen and mineralocorticoid receptors. Phase II clinical trials suggest that the mechanism might consist of blocking or delaying ovulation and of delaying the maturation of the endometrium.Medical Uses* Emergency contraception: For emergency contraception, a 30mg tablet is used within 120 hours (5 days) after an unprotected intercourse or contraceptive failure. It has been shown to prevent about 60% of expected, pregnancies, and prevents more pregnancies than emergency contraception with levonorgestrel.* Treatment of uterine fibroids: Ulipristal acetate is used for preoperative treatment of moderate to severe symptoms of uterine fibroids in adult women of reproductive age in a daily dose of a 5mg tablet. Treatment of uterine fibroids with ulipristal acetate for 13 weeks effectively controlled excessive bleeding due to uterine fibroids and reduced the size of the fibroids.InteractionsUlipristal acetate is metabolized by CYP3A4 in vitro. Ulipristal acetate is likely to interact with substrates of CYP3A4, like rifampicin, phenytoin, St John's wort, carbamazepine or ritonavir. Therefore, concomitant use with these agents is not recommended. It might also interact with hormonal contraceptives and progestogens such as levonorgestrel and other substrates of the progesterone receptor, as well as with glucocorticoids.Adverse EffectsCommon side effects include abdominal pain and temporary menstrual irregularity or disruption. Headache and nausea were observed under long-term administration (12 weeks), but not after a single dose.ContraindicationsUlipristal acetate should not be taken by women with severe liver diseases because of its CYP-mediated metabolism. It has not been studied in women under the age of 18.Pregnancy: Unlike levonorgestrel, and like mifepristone, ulipristal acetate is embryotoxic in animal studies. Before taking the drug, a pregnancy must be excluded.

Question: Biochemical analytes measured in the triple test are all the following Except
A. hCG
B. AFP
C. Unconjugated estriol
D. Inhibin A
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Second-Trimester ScreeningPregnancies with fetal Down syndrome are characterized by lower maternal serum AFP levels--approximately 0.7 MoM, higher hCG levels--approximately 2.0 MoM, and lower unconjugated estriol levels--approximately 0.8 MoM. This triple test can detect 61 to 70 percent of Down syndrome.Levels of all three markers are decreased in the setting of trisomy 18.Ref: William&;s Obstetrics; 24th edition; Chapter 14

Question: Infertility issues with leiomyoma can be addressed by
A. Combined oral contraceptive pills
B. DMPA
C. GnRH agonist
D. Ulipristal
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: GnRH agonist treatment is approved for treating infertility associated with fibroid uterus.

Question: Most common cause of hirsutism in a teenage girl:
A. Ovarian disease
B. Pheochromocytoma
C. Obesity
D. Adrenogenital syndrome
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: As explained earlier PCOD is the most common cause of hirsutism.
PCOD most common affects teenage girls (15–25 years). Therefore, In teenage girls most common cause of hirsutism is PCOD.

Question: Ulceration of the vulva is commonly seen in all except
A. Bacterial vaginosis
B. Syphilis
C. Chancroid
D. Behcet's disease
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. is a, i.e. Bacterial vaginosisRef: Dutta Gynae 6th/ed, p262Vulval ulcersVulval ulcers are predominantly due to sexually transmitted diseases. Rarely, it may be due to non-specific causes.Malignant ulcer is also rare. The various etiological factors related to vulval ulcers are given in the below Table.Ulcers of the VulvaSTD relatedIdiopathicTuberculosisMalignancySystemic disease related or dermatoses* Syphilis* Herpes genitalis* Chancroid* Granuloma inguinale* Lymphogran-uloma venereumBehget's diseaseAphthous ulcersLipschutz ulcersTubercularPrimay* Squamous cell carcinoma* Malignant melanoma* Basal cell carcinomaSecondary* Leukemia* Choriocarcinoma* Lupus erythematosus* Crohn's disease* Lichen planus* Lichen sclerosus* Sjogren's syndromeNote: Lipschutz ulcer: The lesion affects mainly the labia minora and introitus. In acute state, there may be constitutional upset with lymphadenopathy. The causative agent may be Epstein-Barr virus. Treatment is with antiseptic lotions and ointment.

Question: Metrorrhagia is
A. Heavy menstrual bleeding
B. Intermenstrual bleeding
C. Break through bleeding
D. Post coital bleeding
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: The term intermenstrual bleeding is updated nomenclature for metrorrhagia.

Question: The most impoant indication for surgical repair of a Bicornuate Uterus is -
A. Infeility
B. Dysmenorrhoea
C. Menorrhagia
D. Recurrent aboions
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: The most impoant indication for surgical repair of a Bicornuate Uterus is Recurrent aboions Recurrent aboions occur due to - Decreased space for embryo to grow and Relatively less blood supply

Question: OCP protects against all EXCEPT: September2012
A. Hepatic adenoma
B. Fibroadenoma breast
C. Carcinoma ovary
D. Uterine malignancy
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. A i.e. Hepatic adenoma OCP's administration may result in hepatic adenoma. Oral contraceptive pills Protects against: - Uterine Ca, - Ovarian Ca, - RA, - Endometriosis etc.

Question: All the following are the risk factors for cervical cancer except
A. Young age at first intercourse
B. Multiple sexual paners
C. Low parity
D. Low socioeconomic status
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: There are numerous risk factors for cervical cancer: Young age at first intercourse (younger than 16 years), Multiple sexual paners, Cigarette smoking, race, High parity, Low socioeconomic status, and Chronic immune suppression. Reference: Novak's gynaecology; 14th edition; Chapter 35; Uterine cancer

Question: Uterine souffle :
A. Is a soft blowing murmur synchronous with foetal hea sounds
B. Is due to increase in blood flow through the dilated uterine vessels
C. Is due to the active foetal movements
D. Indicates the underlying foetal distress
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. is b i.e. Is due to increase in blood flow through the dilated uterine vessels Uterine souffle is a soft blowing systolic murmur The sound is synchronous with maternal pulse It is due to increase in blood flow through the dilated uterine vessels Heard low down at the sides of the uterus, best on the left side It can also be heard in big uterine fibroid. Note Soft blowing murmur synchronous with the fetal hea sound is called Fetal / Funic souffle.

Question: Galactokinesis means :
A. Sustaining lactation
B. Secretion of milk
C. Ejection of milk
D. Synthesis of milk
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ejection of milk

Question: Hydatidiform - mole, characterized histologically by
A. Hyaline membrane degeneration
B. Hydropic degeneration of the villous stroma
C. Non proliferation of cytotrophoblasts
D. Non proliferation of syncytiotrophoblasts
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: (Hydropic degeneration of the villous storma): Ref: 193-97, 201-DHYDATIDIFORM MOLE (Vesicular mole) - It is an abnormal condition of placenta where there are partly degenerative and partly proliferative changes in the young chorionic villi.* It is best regarded as a benign neoplasm of the chorion with malignant potential* Vaginal bleeding is the commonest presentation (90%) "white currant in red currant juice"* Expulsion of grape like vesicles (rich in HCG) per vaginum is diagnostic of vesicular mole* Histology shows - hydropic degeneration of the villous stroma with absence of blood vessels and trophoblastic proliferationRISK FACTORS FOR MALIGNANT CHANGE* Patient above the age of 40 irrespective of parity* Patients having previous 3 or more births irrespective of age. Age is more important than the parity* Initial serum hCG > 100,000 mIU/ml* Uterine size >20 weeks* Previous history of molar pregnancy* Large (> 6 cm) thecaleutin cystsImportant features of complete and Partial molesFEATURESCOMPLETE (CLASSIC) MOLEINCOMPLETE* Embryo/fetusAbsentPresent* Hydropic degeneration of villiPronounced and diffusedVariable and focal* Trophoblast hyperplasia * Uterine sizeDiffuseFocal* Theca leutin cystsMore than the date (30 - 60%)Less than the date* KaryotypeCommon (25 - 50%)Uncommon* phCG46 XX (85%) Paternal in originTriploid (90%) diploid (10%)* Classic clinical symptomsHigh (> 50, 000)CommonSlight elevation (< 50,000)Rare* Risk of persistent gestational trophoblastic neoplasia (GTN)20%<5%

Question: Post coital test showing non motile sperms in the cervical smear and Motile sperms from the posterior fornix suggests :
A. Faulty coital practice
B. Immunological defect
C. Hypospadias
D. Azoospermia
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. is a i.e. Immunological defect Post coital test is a test for evaluation of the potential role of cervical factor in infeility. The couple is advised intercourse close to ovulation time, in the early hours of morning (preferably) The woman presents herself at the clinic within 2 hours after the intercourse. The mucus is aspirated from the cervical canal and posterior fornix (acts as control) and spread over a glass slide. Result : 10-50 motile Sperms with progressive movement/ HPF in cervical mucus seen Cervical factor ruled out Less than 10 sperms / HPF Need for proper semen analysis to see oligospermia Sperms immotile in mucus aspirated from cervical canal and motile in specimen from posterior fornix or Rotatory/ shaky movement seen in sperms aspirated from cervical canal Immunological defect

Question: Following are more common in multipara women than primipara woman, EXCEPT:
A. Anemia
B. Placenta pre
C. PIH
D. None of the above
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: The incidence of preeclampsia in multiparas is variable but is less than that for primiparas. Risk factors associated with pre-eclampsia: Primigravida (young and elderly) Family history (Hypeension, pre-eclampsia, eclampsia) Placental abnormalities Poor placentation Hyperplacentosis Placental ischemia Molar pregnancy Genetic disorder Immunologic phenomenon New paternity Pre-existing vascular or renal disease Thrombophilias Ref: Textbook of Obstetrics by DC Dutta, 6th edition, Page 222.

Question: What is the sequence of development of pubey in girls ?
A. Thelarche, Pubarche, linear growth spu, Menarche,
B. Pubarche, Thelarche, Menarche, linear growth spu
C. Pubarche, Menarche, Thelarche, linear growth spu
D. Menarche, Thelarche, Pubarche, linear growth spu
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: The sequence of SPECIFIC events of Pubeal events in girls is thelarche, pubarche, linear growth spu, menarche. Please note: This is not to confuse with accelarated general physical growth which is the first event in pubey Pubey Specific events in girls Events in boys 1st Thelarche Testicular enlargement 2nd Pubarche Penile enlargement & pubic hairs 3rd Linear Growth,Height, spu Linear Growth spu 4th Menarche Axillary hair and facial hairs In girls, pubeal development typically takes place over 4.5 years. The first sign of pubey is accelerated growth, and breast budding is usually the first recognized pubeal change, followed by the appearance of pubic hair, peakgrowth velocity, and menarche.... Novaks Gyne

Question: Preimplantataion genetic diagnosis is used for
A. Fetal gender determination
B. Single gene mutation analysis
C. HLA typing
D. Karyotyping
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Pre implantation genetic diagnosis is used for daignosis of single gene disorders such as cystic fibrosis, β - thalassemia and hemophilia.

Question: Benefits of LNG lUCD are all except :
A. Management of menorrhagia
B. Contraceptive effect
C. Hormone replacement therapy after menopause
D. stage 2 endometrial cancer
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Mirena now used as first line of treatment of menorrhagia, in addition to the contraceptive effect. Another use is in providing progestogens component of hormone replacement therapy after menopause. THE TEXTBOOK OF GYNAECOLOGY SHEILA BALAKRISHNAN SECOND EDITION PAGE NO 379

Question: Contraindications of circlage operation are all except:
A. Leaking membranes
B. Features of amnionitis
C. History of vaginal bleeding
D. Pregnancy beyond 14 weeks
Correct Answer: D

Question: All are true about pathogenesis of Ovarian Hyperstimulation Syndrome, EXCEPT?
A. Due to ovarian enlargement and fragility
B. Increase in intravascular volume
C. Role of VEGF and inflammatory cytokines
D. Secondary to infeility treatment
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Symptoms of OHSS are the result of ovarian enlargement and fragility, extravascular fluid accumulation, and intravascular volume depletion (and not increase as stated in option b). Fluid shifts that accompany OHSS are due to increased protein-rich fluid secretion from the stimulated ovaries, increased renin and prorenin within follicular fluid, increased capillary permeability and VEGF

Question: Cryosurgery is used in treatment of cervical intraepithelial neoplasia. It is appropriate in all except
A. Transformation zone lying entirely on ectocervix.
B. Smooth cervical surface without deep crevices.
C. Cervical intraepithelial neoplasia -3.
D. CIN limited to two quadrants of the cervix.
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Cryosurgery is generally not favoured for treatment of CIN-3 due to higher rates of disease persistence following treatment, and lack of histologic specimen to exclude occult invasive cancer.

Question: Which of the following test is used to estimate the amount of fetal maternal hemorrhage:
A. Coomb's test
B. Apt test
C. Liley's spectrophotometer
D. Kleihauer betke test
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: KLEIHAUER BETKE TEST or ACID ELUTION TEST done to measure the amount of feto maternal hemorrhage usually in an Rh negative mother to calculate the dose of anti D required This method is based on the fact that an acid solution (citric acid phosphate buffer, pH 3.5) elutes the adult but not the fetal hemoglobin from the red cells; can detect as little as 0.2 ml of fetal blood diluted in 5 L of maternal blood. More accurate tests are immunofluorescence and flow cytometry. Schiller test:- Schiller's iodine solution is applied to the uterine cervix under direct vision. Normal mucosa contains glycogen and stains brown, whereas abnormal areas, such as early CIN, do not take up the stain and appear white/yellow. Liley's spectrophotometer: Spectrophotometric analysis of amniotic fluid at optical density difference at 450 nm wavelength to see detion bulge in Rh hemolytic disease.

Question: Pawaer burr, appearance on laparoscopy is characteristic of :
A. Endometriosis
B. Endometroid tumour
C. Epithelial ovarian tumour
D. Endometrial cancer
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Endometriosis

Question: The germinal cell layer surrounding the oocyte before ovulation is known as :
A. Zona pellucida
B. Zona reticularis
C. Cumulous oophorus
D. Zona glomerulosa
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: In one area , the granulosa cells are collected together to form a projection into the cavity of graffian follicle. This projection is referred to as the discus proligerus or cumulus oophorus. The ovum itself lies within it.With the exception of area around the discus, the peripheral granulosa cells form a layer only a few cells in thickness.,whereas at the discus the cells are between 12 and 20 layers thick. Reference: Shaw's Textbook of Obstetrics 15th edition page 28

Question: Which is true regarding Savage syndrome?
A. Receptor defect to gonadotrophic hormones
B. Sho stature
C. Ovaries do not contain follicles
D. FSH is normal
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: In Savage syndrome, there is receptor defect to gonadotrophic hormones. The clinical features resemble autoimmune disease. Height is normal. The ovaries contain follicles. FSH is raised. Ref: Shaw's Textbook of Gynaecology, 18th edition, p286

Question: All are true about precocious puberty except -
A. Secondary sexual characters before the age of 8 years
B. Secondary sexual characters before the age of 6 years
C. Menstruation before the age of 10 years
D. Most common cause is constitutional
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. is 'b' i.e., Secondary sexual characters before the age of 6 years o Precocious puberty is the appearance of appropriate secondary sexual characters before the age of 8 years and occurrence of menstruation before 10 years of chronological age.o It is divided into the following types:A) Gonadotropin dependent precocious puberty/ Central precocious puberty / True precocious puberty:# Most common cause is constitutional, due to early maturation and activation of the hypothalamic - pituitary - gonadal axis.# Both breast and pubic hair development in girls# Pubic hair development and testicular enlargement in boys# Early developing sexual characteristics are "isosexual", meaning they are consistent with the child's gender.# Initial spurt in the height followed by premature closure of epiphysis with the result the ultimate height remains stunted.B) Gonadotropin - independent precocious puberty/ Peripheral precocious puberty/Pseudo - precocious puberty:# Exposure to sex steroid hormones that derive from the gonads, the adrenals or the environment.# Further subclassified as isosexual when sexual characters are consistent with gender, and as contrasexual when inconsistent with gender (virilization in girls, or feminization in boys).# Autonomous functional ovarian follicular cysts are the most common cause of gonadotropin - independent precocious puberty in girls.C) Incomplete precocious puberty':# Children with isolated premature thelarche or premature adrenarche. Both usually represent variants of normal pubertal development, but some will progress to complete precocious puberty that may be gonadotropin - dependent or independent.

Question: Glycosylated hemoglobin in a normal pregnant lady should be less than:
A. 4.50%
B. 5.50%
C. 6.50%
D. 7.50%
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: The cut off for glycosylated hemoglobin in a pregnant lady is less than 6.5 %.

Question: What is approx fetal weight, if height of uterus is above pubic symphysis is 35 cm and station of head -2?
A. 2.5 kg
B. 3 kg
C. 3.5 kg
D. 4 kg
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. is c, i.e. 3.5 kgRef. Dutta Obs. 9/e, p 68Estimation of fetal weight can be done using Johnson formula:If station of head below ischial spine x 155If fetal head is at or above ischial spine- x 155 Here fetal head is at - 2, i.e. above ischial spine, so it will be (35 - 12) x 155 = 3.5 kg.Also Know:USG measurement of fetal weight =Shephard formula =Log10 EFW(gm)=1.2508+-(0.002646xACxBPD)Hadlock formula =Log10 EFW(gm)=1.3596-0.00386(ACxFL)+0.0064(HC)+0.00061(BPDxAC)+0.0425(AC)+0.0174(FL)

Question: The double decidual sac sign (DDSS) is the best method for ultrasound diagnosis of
A. Monoamniotic Dichorionic twins
B. Diamniotic dichorionic twins
C. Ectopic pregnancy
D. Normal pregnancy
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Double decidual sac sign on USG - Intra-uterine sac (Eccentrically placed) Outer layer - Decidua Parietalis Inner layer - Decidua Capsularis Indicates - Intrauterine pregnancy Intradecidual ring sign is the first sign of pregnancy on USG.

Question: Low bih weight baby is defined as baby weighing: September 2006
A. 1000 gm
B. 1500 gm
C. 2000 gm
D. 2500 gm
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ans. D: 2500 gm Low bih weight (LBW) is defined as a fetus that weighs less than 2500 g (5 lb 8 oz) regardless of gestational age. Other definitions include Very Low Bih Weight (VLBW) which is less than 1500 g, and Extremely Low Bih Weight (ELBW) which is less than 1000 g. Normal Weight at term delivery is 2500 g - 4200 g. SGA is not a synonym of LBW, VLBW or ELBW. Small for gestational age (SGA) babies are those whose bih weight, length, or head circumference lies below the 10th percentile for that gestational age

Question: Venous drainage of upper pa of uterus and placenta is through :
A. Ovarian vein
B. Uterine vein
C. Internal iliac vein
D. None
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ovarian vein

Question: A 26 years old G2P1L1 at 10 weeks complains of pain abdomen and bleeding per vaginum. On examination products of conception are seen paially extruding through the cervix. What is your diagnosis?
A. Inevitable aboion
B. Threatened aboion
C. Complete aboion
D. Incomplete aboion
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Bleeding follows paial or complete placental separation and dilation of the cervical os in incomplete aboion. The fetus and the placenta may remain entirely within the uterus or paially extrude through the dilated os.Management is Evacuation or medical termination (if stable).Reference: William's Obstetrics; 25th edition; Chapter 18; Aboion

Question: Which is not primary amenorrhea?
A. Sheehan's syndrome
B. Kallmann's syndrome
C. Mayer Rokitansky Koster Hauser syndrome
D. Turner syndrome
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. is a, i.e. Sheehan's syndromeRef: Shaw 14th/ed, p256-257* Kallmann's sydnrome is due to hypothalamic dysfunction characterized by a deficiency of gonadotropin releasing hormone (GnRH) causing a hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism. This is associated with anosmia. It can occasionally be associated with optic problems, such as color blindness or optic atrophy, nerve deafness, cleft palate, cryptorchidism, renal agenesis, and mirror movement disorder.* MRKH syndrome, also known as Mullerian agenesis is due to anatomical absence of uterus. This is the second most common cause of primary amenorrhea.* Turner's syndrome is a type of gonadal dysgenesis and is overall the most common cause of primary amenorhea* Sheehan's syndrome is postpartum pituitary necrosis. It leads to secondary amenorrhea and not primary amenorrhea.

Question: 16 yr unmarried girl came for vaccination against cervical cancer. Which vaccine to he given:
A. Gardasil
B. Rabivac
C. Biovac
D. Tvac
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. (A) Gardasil(Ref: Shaw's Textbook of Gynecology 16th Ed; Page No 495)Gardasil is the vaccine of choice in this situation.Other options:Biovac: It is freeze-dried live attenuated vaccine indicated for the prevention of Hepatitis A in persons of age 1 year or older.Rabivac: It is monovalent inactivated rabies vaccine for cats and dogs.Tvac: It is tetanus vaccine.HPV vaccinesHPV vaccines have been developed from the inactivated capsid coat of the virus.HPV vaccines were earlier of two types. During its Feb 2015, meeting Advisory Committee on Immunization Practises (ACIP) recommended 9-valent HPV vaccine (9V HVP) as one of the three vaccines for preventive HPV.CharacteristicBivalent (2V HPV)Quadrivalent (4V HPV)9 Valent (9VHPV)Brand nameCervarixGardasilGardasil-9HPV subtypes16,186,11,16,186, 11, 16, 18, 31, 33, 45, 52, 58Protects againstCIN, Ca cervixAnogenital warts, CIN, Ca cervixAnogenital warts CIN, Ca cervix, vulva intraepithelial neoplasia, vaginal intraepithelial neoplasiaManufacturingTrichoplusia insect line infected with L1 encoding baculovirusSaccharomyces cerevisiae expressing L1Saccharomyces cerevisiaeexpressing L1Adjuvant500 mcg aluminum hydroxide with monophosphoryl lipid A225 mcg Al(OH)PO4 SO4 500 meg Al(OH)PO4 SO4 Dose0.5 mL0.5 mL0.5 mLAdministration1/m1/m1/mAdministered to males or femalesOnly femalesBoth males and femalesBoth males and femalesAge in females Ideal age range11-12 years9-26 years11-12 years9-26 years11-12 years9-26 yearsAge in males Ideal age range---11-12 years9-26 years11-12 years9-15 years--FDA approved9-26 years--ACIP recommendation

Question: Infants of diabetic mothers are likely to have the following cardiac anomaly:
A. Coarctation of aorta
B. Fallot's tetralogy
C. Ebstein's anomaly
D. Transposition of great arteries
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ans. is d, i.e. Transposition of great arteriesRef. Fernando Arias 3/e, p 454As VSD is not given in the options, transposition of great vessels is the single best answer.

Question: A 38-year-old woman complains to her physician of chronic pelvic pain that is much worse during her menstrual periods. Pelvic examination demonstrates an enlarged uterus with multiple palpable masses. Ultrasound shows that a large number of ball-like masses up to 6 cm diameter are present in the uterus. Most cases of this type of tumor are found at which of the following sites?
A. Intramurally in the cervix of the uterus
B. Intramurally in the fundus or body of the uterus
C. Submucosally in the cervix of the uterus
D. Submucosally in the fundus or body of the uterus
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: The vast majority of leiomyomas are found in the uterine fundus or body; with only 3% being found in the cervix. Of the leiomyomas in the fundus or body, 95% are intramural, with the remainder being located subserosally or submucosally.

Question: Forceps delivery is done in all except:
A. Mentoposterior
B. Deep transverse arrest
C. After coming head
D. Maternal heart disease
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Option ‘a’
Mentoposterior: Before going on to mentoposterior, lets see mentoanterior.
Mentoanterior
​Dutta Obs. 7/e, p 390
In mentoanterior face presentation there is place for spontaneous vaginal delivery and liberal episiotomy is all that is required. In case of delay, forceps delivery is done.
In mentoposterior: 20 to 30% cases rotate anteriorly through 3/8 of circle and deliver as mento anterior, there fore trial of labour may be given in hope of anterior rotation of chin, followed by spontaneous/forceps delivery. In the rest 70-80%, incomplete anterior rotation/ non rotation occurs.
In these persistent mentoposterior: cesarean section is the only management. Therefore in mentoposterior per se forceps is not applied, only when it rotates anteriorly and becomes mentoanterior, forceps are applied.
Option ‘b’
Deep transverse arrest
Management options in case of deep transverse arrest are:
Dutta Obs. 7/e, p 372
Ventouse: Ideal for all cases
Cesarean section: If the pelvis is android or there is CPD, cesarean section should be done. In modern obstetrics, traumatic vaginal delivery causing intracranial hemorrhage is to be avoided at all costs and so there is increasing use of cesarean section for deep transverse arrest.
Other options are:

Manual rotation followed by outlet forceps application.
Forceps rotation and delivery using Keilland forceps.
Craniotomy if the baby is dead.

As far as options ‘c’ and ‘d’ are concerned: In after coming head of breech, and in heart disease forceps are routinely applied.

Question: The drug that inhibits uterine contractility and cause pulmonary edema is :
A. Ritodrine
B. Nifedipine
C. lndomethacin
D. Atosiban
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. is a i.e. Ritodrine Pulmonary edema is a serious complication of beta-adrenergic therapy (ritodrine) and MgSO4. This complication occurs in patients receiving oral or (more common) intravenous treatment. It occurs more frequently in patients who have excessive plasma volume expansion, such as those with twins or those who have received generous amounts of intravenous fluids and in patients with chorioamnionitis. Patient presents with respiratory distress, bilateral rales on auscultation of the lungs, pink frothy sputum, and typical X-ray picture. Patients receiving IV beta-adrenergic drugs should be monitored continuously with pulse oxymeter to anticipate the development of pulmonary edema.

Question: According to Hellin's law chances of twins in pregnancy are:
A. 1 in 60
B. 1 in 70
C. 1 in 80
D. 1 in 90
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: According to Hellin’s rule
The mathematical frequency of multiple pregnancy is:

Twins 1 in 80
Triplets 1 in (80)2
Quadruplets 1 in (80)3 and so on

Question: A multipara with 34 weeks pregnancy tachycardia, fever, hepatospleenomegaly, pallor has :
A. Malaria
B. Iron deficiency anaemia
C. Physiological anaemia
D. Megaloblastic anaemia
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Malaria

Question: All of the following are direct causes of maternal moality except:
A. APH
B. PPH
C. Hea disease
D. Eclampsia
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. is c i.e. Hea disease

Question: Age of gestation when ovaries and testis are first distinguishable :
A. 4 weeks
B. 8 weeks
C. 12 weeks
D. 16 weeks
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: 8 weeks

Question: Which of the following is indicated by the term 'mittelschmerz'?
A. Fern pattern of cervical mucus
B. Peritoneal irritation from corpus hemorrhagicum
C. Rise of body temperature due to effect of progesterone
D. LH surge before ovulation
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: The follicle that ruptures at the time of ovulation promptly fills with blood, forming what is sometimes called a corpus hemorrhagicum. Minor bleeding from the follicle into the abdominal cavity may cause peritoneal irritation and fleeting lower abdominal pain ("mittelschmerz"). The granulosa and theca cells of the follicle lining promptly begin to proliferate, and the clotted blood is rapidly replaced with yellowish, lipid-rich luteal cells, forming the corpus luteum. Ref: Alford C., Nurudeen S. (2013). Chapter 4. Physiology of Reproduction in Women. In A.H. DeCherney, L. Nathan, N. Laufer, A.S. Roman (Eds), CURRENT Diagnosis & Treatment: Obstetrics & Gynecology, 11e.

Question: A 20 year female presents with a ovarian mass 6x 6 x 6cm in size. Ultrasonography reveals solid structures in the mass. Her serum biomarkers such as AFP. fO-hCG and CA 125 are normal, however, her serum alkaline phosphatase was found to be elevated. The most likely diagnosis is
A. Dysgerminoma
B. Endodermal sinus tumor
C. Malignant teratoma
D. Mucinous cystadenocarcinoma
Correct Answer: A

Question: A 55-year-old woman was found to have Ca cervix, FIGO stage 2-3, locally advanced. What would be the management?:
A. Surgery plus chemotherapy
B. radiotherapy plus chemotherapy
C. Chemotherapy
D. Radiotherapy plus HPV vaccine
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: As discussed in detail in preceeding text best for cervical cancer of (stages II B to IV A) is chemoradiation (i.e. chemotherapy and radiotherapy), where by cisplatin is used as a radiosensitiser to increase the sensitivity of the cells to radiotherapy before giving radiotherapy.
Since in this question –chemotherapy + radiotherapy is given as one of the options, hence, we will mark it as the correct option.

Question: During a hysterectomy and an oophorectomy, the uterine and ovarian vessels must be ligated. These vessels can be found in which ligaments?
A. Broad and ovarian
B. Broad and suspensory
C. Round and ovarian
D. Round and suspensory
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: The uterine vessels are found in the inferior poion of the broad ligament, while the ovarian vessels are found in the suspensory ligaments of the ovaries. The suspensory ligaments of the ovaries are peritoneal folds covering ovarian aeries , veins, nerves, and lymphatics as the structures pass over the pelvic brim to reach the ovary. The ovarian ligament proper is a round cord which attaches the ovary to the uterus, just below the entrance of the uterine tube into the uterus. The round ligament of the uterus is a connective tissue band that attaches the uterus to the inner aspect of the labium majus,it traverses the inguinal canal and it is found in the broad ligament. Ref: Hoffman B.L., Schorge J.O., Schaffer J.I., Halvorson L.M., Bradshaw K.D., Cunningham F.G., Calver L.E. (2012). Chapter 38. Anatomy. In B.L. Hoffman, J.O. Schorge, J.I. Schaffer, L.M. Halvorson, K.D. Bradshaw, F.G. Cunningham, L.E. Calver (Eds), Williams Gynecology, 2e.

Question: Which is true regarding ovary:
A. Mesovarium contains ovarian vessels
B. Ovarian ligament connects ovaries to uterus
C. Ovarian fossa is related to ilioinguinal
D. Suspensory ligament of ovary connects ovaries to uterus
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. is b i.e. Ovarian ligament connects ovar ovaries to uterus.REMEMBERMesovarium connects ovary posteriorly to the broad ligament.Ovarian ligament connects ovary to uterus (option b)Suspensory ligament or infundibulopelvic ligament connects ovary to lateral pelvic wall.Ovarian vessels and nerves are present in suspensory ligament.Ovarian fossa is related posteriorly to obturator nerve, not ilioinguinal nerve.

Question: Regarding autoimmune hemolytic anemia in pregnancy all are true except
A. Direct coombs test is usually positive
B. Pregnancy accelerates hemolysis
C. Usually does not respond to steroids
D. Fetal michrochimerism results in aberrant antibody production
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: During pregnancy, autoimmune hemolytic anaemia usually responds to prednisolone.

Question: Asherman syndrome is due to :
A. Overdose drugs
B. Postaboion curettage
C. Speticemia
D. Contraceptal pills
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Postaboion curettage

Question: Halban's disease is due to
A. Persistent corpus luteum
B. Deficient corpus luteum
C. Persistent trophoblast
D. Deficient trophoblast
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Halban's disease: Rare, self-limiting process. Also called Irregular shedding endometrium Due to persistent corpus luteum due to incomplete withdrawal of LH even on 26 in day of cycle. The corpus luteum continues to secret progesterones Menstruation comes on time, is prolonged but not heavy. Slight bleeding continues intermittently for several days after proper flow. On D& C done on 5-6th of cycle - endometrial tissue shows presence of proliferative endometrium along with secretory endometrium

Question: HSV 2 causes:
A. Genital herpes
B. Genital warts
C. Herpes zoster
D. Genital ulcer
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans: a (Genital herpes) Ref: Shaw, 13th ed, p. 113Heipes genitalis is caused by HSV type 2. It is the most common DNA viral infection encountered in vulval disease.Symptoms: Tingling, itching, paraesthesia - vesicles - painful ulcers.Treatment: AcyclovirNote:Genital warts (condyloma accuminata) caused by HPV 6,11.Heipes zoster is caused by varicella virus.

Question: True about Hematological change in Pregnancy
A. Total blood volume increases 40% by term
B. The hematocrit increases
C. Red cell volume does not increase until 20 weeks
D. Hematocrit increases due to an increased RBC volume relative to plasma volume
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Hemoglobin concentration and Hematocrit decrease slightly during pregnancy.

Question: Which of the following is true regarding precocious puberty:
A. Sexual maturity is attained early
B. Mental function is increased
C. No reproductive function
D. Body proportions are enlarged
Correct Answer: A

Question: True statement regarding sarcoma botryoides:a)  Involvement of vaginab) Grape like growth seenc) Common in old aged) Malignant
A. abd
B. bcd
C. abc
D. ab
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Embryonal Rhabdomyosarcoma is the most common malignancy of the vagina in infants and children.
Most common subtype of embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma is sarcoma botyroides

Seen in infants and children less than 5 years of age.
"This rare tumor develops almost exclusively in girls younger than 5 years, although vaginal and cervical sarcoma botryoides have been reported in females aged 15 to 20 years."  - William Gynae 1st /ed p 683
"Sarcoma botryoides are usually seen in patients who are younger than 5 years of age." - COGDT 10th ed p 831
In infants and children, sarcoma botyroides is usually found in vagina, in reproductive age females rhabdomyosarcoma is seen within the cervix and after menopause within the uterus.
The gross appearance of the tumor resembles pinkish bunch of grapes —it can be in the form of multiple polyp like structures or can be a solitary growth with pedunculated appearance.
Histologically-its characteristic finding is "rhabdomyoblast."

Clinical features
The presenting features are:


Blood stained vaginal discharge
Anaemia and cachexia

Management
Chemotherapy — vincristine actinomycin D and cyclophasphamide followed by conservative surgery to excise residual tumor is the treatment of choice. Newer studies have revealed that primary chemotherapy without surgery is adequate for most patients.

Question: LH surge occurs at
A. At the time of ovulation
B. 5-6 days before ovulation
C. 24-36 hours before ovulation
D. 24 - 72 hours after ovulation
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: C. i.e. (24 - 36 hours before ovulation) (37-Shaw's 14th/64-Dutta 4th)* LH surge precedes ovulation by 24 to 36 hours (mean 30 hours) and minimum of 75 ng/ml is required for ovulation (37 - Shaw's 14th)* LH levels remains almost static throughout the cycle except at least 12 hours prior to vulation. When it attains its peak, called LH surge (64 - Dutta 4th)* The main function of LH is steroidogenic, but along with FSH. It is responsible for full maturation of the graffian follicle and oocyte and ovulation

Question: Time taken for capacitation of sperms is
A. 2-4 hours
B. 4-6 hours
C. 6-8 hours
D. 8-10 hours
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Capacitation is the process of reconditioning of the sperm, making it more suitable for penetration into the ovum. 
It takes about 6-8 hours and occurs in FGT chiefly in the tubes.

Question: Size of uterus in inches:
A. 5x4x2
B. 4x3x1
C. 3x2x1
D. 4x2x1
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. is c, i.e. 3x2x1 inchesRef: Jeffcoates Principle of Gynae 9/ed, pg 32Remember, best answer to this question is 3.25x2.5x1.5 inches.

Question: Perception of uterine contraction is known as:
A. Chadwik sign
B. Goodell sign
C. Palmer sign
D. Hegar sign
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans: c (Palmer sign) Ref: Dutta, 6th ed, p. 66Perception of rhythmic uterine contraction on bimanual examination in pregnancy is Palmer sign. It is done as early as 4-8 weeks. This is one of the signs used to diagnose pregnancy. There are various signs and symptoms to detect early pregnancy. These are listed below:Diagnosis of pregnancy1st trimester - Amenorrhoea- Morning sickness- Freq. of micturition- Breast discomfortPlacental signBleeding at the time of next periodHartman signImplantation bleedingJacquemiersign(Chadwick sign)Blue hue of vestibule and anterior vaginal wallOsiandersignIncreased pulsation in the lateral fornixGoodell signCervix becomes softPiskacek signDuring lateral implantation one half of the uterus becomes more firm than other halfHegars signOn bimanual palpation upper uterus and cervix are felt separately, due to the softening of lower part of body of uterus.(6-10 weeks)Palmer signRhythmic uterine contraction during bimanual examination.2nd trimester- Quickening (16-18 wks)- Chloasma (20 wks)- Breast changes - Secondary areola- Montgomery tubercles -Colostrum - 12 wks- Linea nigra- Striae gravidarum- Ext. ballotment- Int. ballotment

Question: Women with PCOS and Hirsutism, management is :
A. Ethinyl estradiol
B. Ethinyl estradiol + Cyproterone Acetate
C. Levonorgestrel
D. Ethinyl estradiol + Levonorgestrel
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Drugs used for Hirusitism: 1.Ovarian Suppression agents a.Oral Contraceptives b.Cyproterone acetate. c.GnRH agonist and antagonist. 2.Adrenal suppresion agents a.Glucocoicoids. 3.Androgen receptor blocking agents a.Spironolactone b.Flutamide. c.Cyproterone acetate. 5. 5 alpha reductase inhibitor a.Finasteride. Shaw's textbook of Gynecology 16th edition page no 152

Question: CVS change in pregnancy -
A. Slight right axis deviation in ECG
B. Slight left axis deviation in ECG
C. Diastolic murmur
D. Pulse rate is decreased
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. is 'b' i.e., Slight left axis deviation in ECG Cardiovascular systemo Anatomical changes heart is pushed upwards & outward. Apex beat is shifted in 4th intercostals space. A systolic murmur can be heard in apical or pulmonary area. Mammary' murmur is a continuous hissing murmur audible over tricuspid area in left 2nd & 3rd intercostals space. ECG shows left axis deviation. S3 and rarely S4 can be heard.o Cardiac output starts to increase from 5th week of pregnancy, reaches its peak 40-50% at about 30-34 weeks. It is lowest in sitting or supine position & highest is the right or left lateral or knee chest position. CO further increases by 50% during labour and immediately following delivery. CO returns to pre labour values by one hour following delivery and to the pre-pregnant level by another 4 weeks,o Blood pressure systemic vascular resistance (SVR) decreases. Maternal BP is decreased,o Venous pressure femoral venous pressure is raised,o Supine hypotension syndrome (postural hypotension)o Regional distribution of blood flow uterine blood flow is increased from 50 ml per minute in non-pregnant state to 750ml near term. Pulmonary blood flow is increased by 2500 ml /minrenal blood flow increases by 400ml/min. The blood flow through skin and mucous membrane increases by 500ml/min.

Question: Barr body is seen in :
A. Turners syndrome
B. Klinefelters syndromeTesticular feminisation
C. Tesiicular leminisation syndrome
D. 46 XY
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Klinefelters syndrome

Question: At what level of b-hCG is it that normal pregnancy can be earliest detected by TVS (transvaginal USG)?
A. 500 IU/mL
B. 1000 IU/mL
C. 1500 IU/mL
D. 2000 IU/mL
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. is b, i.e. 1000IU/MLRef Dutta Obs. 7/e, p 642Critical titre of hCG:b-hCG level (mIU/ml)Structure visibleTVS/TAS* 1000-1200Gestational sacTVS* 6000Gestational SacTAS

Question: A 28 year old female nearing her date of delivery has been admitted following regular contractions. The resident doctor did an examination documents that the head is at +1 station.Where is the exact position of head?
A. High up in the FALSE pelvis
B. Just above ischial spine
C. Just below ischial spine
D. At the perineum
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Station is leading point of Head. Station 0 = Head at level of Ischial spines + means below Ischial spines - means above Ischial spines Numbers like 1 , 2 denote distance in cm below or above Ischial spine

Question: In a lady at 32 weeks pregnancy is given an injection of dexamethasone to prevent which of the following in the newborn ?
A. Respiratory Distress Syndrome
B. Neonatal convulsion
C. Neonatal jaundice
D. Cerebral palsy
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: The lung maturity occurs at 34 weeks of gestation and this is ceified by checking the L:S ratio which should be > 2:1 or appearance of Phosphatidyl glycerol in the amniotic fluid. Maternal administration of coicosteroid is advocated where the pregnancy is less than 34 weeks. This helps in fetal lung maturation so that the incidence of RDS, Intra Ventricular Hemorrhage , Necrotising Enterocolitis , and Patent Ductus Aeriosus are minimized. Respiratory distress of newborn often results in multiple debility in the fetus if not prevented.

Question: Initial site of RBC production in fetus-
A. Gestational sac
B. Yolk sac
C. Placeta
D. Fetal bones
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. is 'b' i.e., Yolk sac* Embryonic and fetal hematopoiesis occurs in three phases: megaloblastic, hepatic, and myeloid. At each phase of RBC development both the sites of production and the cell composition change.* Sites and stages of fetal erythropoiesis: Primitive erythropoiesis begins in the yolk sac at 2 to 3 weeks after conception. By the end of the first trimester, the liver has become the main erythroid organ. The liver is the primary source of red blood cells during the second trimester, and the bone marrow is the primary source of red blood cells during the last trimester

Question: NOT included in third stage of labour
A. Controlled cord traction
B. lM-oxytocin
C. IV methergin
D. Uterine massage
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: (C) (IV - Methergin) (142 - Dutta 7th)Methergin 0.2 mg IM (Intramuscular) to the mother within one minute of delivery of the babyOyxtocin may be given with crowning of the head, with delivery of the anterior shoulder of the baby or after the delivery of the placenta.Components of Active Management of Third stage of Labour (WHO)* Administration of uterotonic (oxytocin/Ergometrine) soon after birth of baby* Delayed cord clamping and cutting* Controlled Cord traction for delivery of placenta* Uterine massageCurrent evidence show that delayed cord clamping is beneficial for baby, immediate cord clamping has been shown to increase the incidence of iron deficiency anemia for premature and LBW babies immediate cord clamping can also increase the risk of intraventricular haemorrhage and late onset sepsis

Question: The recipient twin in monochorionic twin gestation effected by twin-twin transfusion syndrome is characterised by all except
A. Thrombosis
B. Hypovolemia
C. Kernicterus
D. Heart failure
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: In TTTS, recipient twin has circulatory overload, hyper volemia and heart failure.

Question: Which of the following is the most common site of secondaries in a case of choriocarcinoma?
A. Vagina
B. Urethra
C. Lung
D. Brain
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: In 75% of cases metastasis from choriocarcinoma occurs into the lungs and rest usually occurs in the vagina. Other organs which may also contain metastases are vulva, kidneys, liver, ovaries, brain and bowel.

Question: One of the following is used for sex chromatin testing :
A. Barr body
B. Testosterone receptors
C. Hormone levels
D. Phenotypic features
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Chromosomal sex can be determined by the study of the leucocytes or by simply taking a smear from the buccal mucosa The nuclei of the female chromosome contains a stainable body called the sex chromatin, hence female cells are termed as chromatin positive. In epithelial cell nuclei this small peripherally situated darkly staining nodule is called Barr body. Male cell nuclei lack this body and termed chromatin negative. Ref: SHAW'S TEXTBOOK OF GYNAECOLOGY; 15th edition; Pg no:108

Question: Which of the following anti-hypertensive is contraindicated in pregnancy:
A. Beta blockers
B. ACE inhibitors
C. Methyldopa
D. Ca channel blockers
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. (b) ACE inhibitorsRef KDT 6th ed. 553; Williams 24th ed, /: 1025* ACEs are the drugs which inhibit the conversion of angiotensin-I to angiotensin-II. They can cause severe fetal malformations when given in the second and third trimesters.* These include: Hypocalvaria and renal dysfunction and are also teratogenic and because of this, they are not recommended during pregnancy* Angiotensin-receptor blockers act in a similar manner.But, instead of blocking the production of angiotensin- II, they inhibit binding to its receptor. They are presumed to have the same fetal effects as ACE inhibitors and thus are also contraindicated.Antihypertensive to be avoided during pregnancyAntihypertensive safer during pregnancy* ACE inhibitors (Ex- captopril, enelapril etc.)* Angiotensin antagonist (losartan, telmesartan)* Thiazide diuretics (Ex- hydrochlorthiazide)* Furosemide* Propanolol* Nitroprusside* Hydralazine* Methyldopa* Atenolol* Metoprolol* Labetalol-DOC* Nifedipine* Prazosin and ClonidineDrugs and their respective risk* Diuretics: tend to reduce blood volume; increase risk of placental infarcts, fetal wastage, stillbirth.* ACE inhibitors, ATI antagonists: growth retardation and fetal damage risk.* Propanolol: causes low birth weight, neonatal hypoglycemia and bradycardia.* Nitroprusside: contraindicated in eclampsia.

Question: Anita 15-year-old, complains of heavy periods since 2 months. O/E: wt 40 kg and BP 120/80 mmHg. All of the following investigations are indicated, except :
A. TSH
B. Platelet count
C. Bleeding and clotting time
D. Estradiol levels
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Investigations in a case of pubey menorrhagia : 1.Blood profile--Hb%, bleeding and clotting time, coagulation factors; blood film. 2.X-ray chest for tuberculosis. 3.Thyroid function tests. 4.Pelvic ultrasound PCOD, early fibroid. 5.If medical treatment fails, D&C should be done to rule out endometrial tuberculosis by PCR test. Reference: Shaw's Textbook of Gynaecology 16th edition page no 340

Question: Laser Endometrial ablation is done in abnormal uterine bleeding in all cases except
A. Women not preferring surgery
B. Small uterine fibroids
C. Women preferring reproductive function
D. Failed medical treatment
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Females who desire future pregnancy should not be offered endometrial ablation for AUB.

Question: "Chemical pregnancy" means :
A. Negative beta HCG and absent gestational sac
B. Positive beta HCG and present gestational sac
C. Positive beta HCG and absent gestational sac
D. Negative beta HCG and created sac margin
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Positive beta HCG and absent gestational sac

Question: Which of the following pubeal events in girls is not estrogen dependant
A. Menstruation
B. Vaginal cornification
C. Height spu
D. Hair growth
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Functions of estrogen Estrogen changes the vaginal epithelium from cuboidal to stratified type,which is more resistant to trauma and infection Marked proliferation of endometrial stroma and greatly increases the development of the endometrial glands - Menstruation Development of the stromal tissue of breast, growth of an extensive ductile system and deposition of fat Increase in osteoblastic activity and growth rate becomes rapid for several years Estrogens do not greatly affect hair distribution and growth. However hair develops in the pubic region and axilla after pubey. Androgens produced by the adrenal glands are responsible for this TEXTBOOK OF MEDICAL PHYSIOLOGY,GUYTON,Pg no:905,906,8th edition

Question: Uterine-cervix ratio up to 10 years of age:
A. 3:02
B. 2:01
C. 3:01
D. 1:02
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: The relationship of the length of the cervix and that of the body of uterus varies with age.

Question: Placental abnormality related to PPH is?
A. Placenta accreta
B. Placenta percreta
C. Retained placental
D. All the above
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ans. is 'd' i.e., All the abovePlacenta: morbidly adherent placenta (accrete, percreta), paially or completely separately separated placenta but with retained bits of placental tissue leads to PPH.

Question: Cesarean section is absolutely indicated in :
A. Previous H/0 LSCS
B. Type IV placenta pre
C. Type II placenta pre
D. Past H/o hysterotomy
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Type IV placenta pre

Question: True about centchroman are all, EXCEPT :
A. It is synthetic non -- steroidal contraceptive
B. The only side effect is oligomenorrhoea
C. Safe in liver disease
D. Can be used as post -- coital pill
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Safe in liver disease

Question: First investigation done for abnormal uterine bleeding in reproductive age group is _______
A. Ultrasonography transabdominal
B. Pap smear
C. Urine Beta HCG
D. Ultrasonography transvaginal
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: The first investigation for abnormal uterine bleeding is Urine Beta HCG to rule ouut pregnancy. Abnormal Uterine Bleeding(AUB): is a common and debilitating condition. Chronic AUB was defined as &;bleeding from the uterine corpus that is abnormal in volume, regularity and/or timing that has been present for the majority of the last 6 months. AUB may affect females of all ages. Factors that influence incidence most greatly are age and reproductive status. A structured approach for establishing the cause using the FIGO PALM COEIN classification system will facilitate accurate diagnosis and inform treatment options. In the reproductive age group , the hypothalamic-pituitary-ovarian (HPO) axis matures, and anovulatory uterine bleeding is encountered less often. The diagnostic goal is exclusion of pregnancy and identification of the underlying pathology to allow optimal treatment. Miscarriage, ectopic pregnancies, and hydatidiform moles may cause life-threatening hemorrhage. Pregnancy complications are quickly excluded with determination of urine and serum Beta-human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG levels). This is typically obtained on all reproductive-aged women. Other options: Pap smear evaluation is usually done for cervical and endometrial cancers which are commonly seen in peri and post menopausal women. Transvaginal sonography (TVS) typically offers greater patient comfo and suitable detection of postmenopausal endometrial hyperplasia and cancer compared to transabdominal ultrasonography. Ref: Shaw&;s textbook of Gynaecology 17th edition Pgno: 139

Question: True statements regarding epilepsy in pregnancy is:
A. Seizure frequency decreases in majority
B. Monotherapy is preferred to polydrug therapy
C. No increase in incidence of epilepsy in offspring
D. Breastfeeding is contraindicated
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. is b, i.e. Monotherapy is preferred to polydrug therapy --Dutta Obs 7/e, p 291As discussed earlier, seizure frequency remains unchanged in majority during pregnancy."Frequency of convulsions is unchanged in majority (50%) and is increased in some." --Dutta 7/e, p 291"The risk of developing epilepsy to the offspring of an epileptic mother is 10%." --Dutta 7/e, p 291So, option c is incorrect."There is no contraindication for breastfeeding." --Dutta 7/e, p 291so option d is incorrect.We have read time and again that monotherapy is preferred in pregnant epileptic patient.

Question: Which of the following decrease sex hormone binding globulin
A. Oral contraceptive pills
B. Insulin
C. Thyroxine Hormone
D. Pregnancy
Correct Answer: B

Question: Contraception of choice for a post paum village woman with one child :
A. Barrier
B. Copper T
C. Oral pills
D. Spermicide
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Copper T

Question: A patient presents with LMP 8 weeks ago. She has history of delayed cycles in the past. Which of the following is the most accurate way of dating the pregnancy?
A. Determination of uterine size on pelvic examination
B. Quantitative serum HCG level
C. Crown-rump length on abdominal or vaginal ultrasound
D. Determination of progesterone level along with serum HCG level
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: CRL is the best USG parameter to determine gestational age in first trimester Crown rump length - it is the longest straight line measurement of the embryo from the other margin of cephalic pole to rump mid-sagittal plane with fetus in neutral , non fixed position - Best seen on TVS - Overall best USG parameter to assess the fetal age - Ideal time to measures CRL is 7 - 10 weeks - can be done upto 14 weeks

Question: A female wanted to have an emergency contraception after an unprotected intercourse. Which of these is NOT useful as an emergency contraceptive?
A. LNG IUD
B. Oral Mifepristone
C. Oral Levonorgestrel
D. Cu-containing IUD
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Post coital or emergency contraceptives are, Ethinyl oestradiol Conjugated estrogen Ethinyl oestradiol + Norgestrel Levonorgestrel Mifepristone Copper IUDs Ref: Textbook of Obstetrics by D.C. Dutta, 6th edition, Page 550.

Question: Which of the following is present normally in the urine of a pregnant women in the third trimester and lactation?
A. Glucose
B. Lactose
C. Galactose
D. Fructose
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Glucosuria during pregnancy is not necessarily abnormal. The appreciable increase in glomerular filtration, together with impaired tubular reabsorptive capacity for filtered glucose, accounts in most cases for glucosuria. Though glucosuria is common during pregnancy, the possibility of diabetes mellitus should not be Ignored when it is identified.

Question: In stage III ovarian cancer patient with upper abdominal disease < 5cm, management of choice is
A. Debulking surgery
B. Mantle cell irradiation
C. Abdomino-pelvic radiotherapy
D. Neo-adjuvant chemotherapy
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Management of Advanced stage diseaseIncludes stage III and IVDebulking surgery versus neoadjuvant chemotherapy followed by Postoperative chemotherapyPrimary cytoreduction surgery is the preferred in1. Retroperitoneal only disease preoperatively 2. Patients with stage IIIC or IV disease with good performance status who have < 5cm upper abdominal disease 3. Patients who are considered ideal for intraperitoneal chemotherapy if optimally reducedNeoadjuvant chemotherapy and interval debulking surgery is preferred in1. Patients with bulky upper abdominal peritoneal disease >5cm in diameter2. Medically unfit for surgeryPostoperative chemotherapySystemic chemotherapy with 6 cycles of carboplatin and paclitaxelPostoperative radiotherapy1. Not effective compared to chemotherapy2. Used clear cell or mucinous carcinomasMAINTENANCE THERAPY1. No role after the complete clinical response 2. Drugs used: 3month or 12month paclitaxel every 28days

Question: Feilization occurs in which pa of the fallopian tube
A. Ampulla
B. Isthmus
C. Interstitial
D. Infundibular
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: REF : DUTTA OBG 9TH ED

Question: An 6 cm simple ovarian cyst was identified in late pregnancy, what would be the best management ?:
A. Emergency laparotomy
B. Removal after after 6 weeks of puerperium
C. Removal early in the puerperium
D. Conservative as most tumors would subside
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Treatment of ovarian tumour in pregnancy depending on time of pregnancy: During pregnancy In an uncomplicated case, the best time of elective operation is b/w 14-18wks as chances of aboion are less and access to the pedicle is easy. But if the tumour is diagnosed beyond 36 weeks, tumour is removed early in puerperium. During labour If the tumour is above the presenting pa watchful expectancy is followed but if its impacted in pelvis, caesarian section should be done followed by removal of tumour in same setting. During puerperium The tumour should be removed as early in puerperium as possible because the longer is the wait for the surgery, there is more chance of having the tumor undergo a torsion

Question: After a normal prenatal period, a lady developed sudden HTN and bleeding from all places. Diagnosis is:
A. DIC
B. Aplastic anemia
C. ITP
D. APLA
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: (A) DIC# Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation (DIC), also known as disseminated intravascular coagulopathy or less commonly as consumptive coagulopathy, is a pathological process characterized by the widespread activation of the clotting cascade that results in the formation of blood clots in the small blood vessels throughout the body. This leads to compromise of tissue blood flow and can ultimately lead to multiple organ damage. In addition, as the coagulation process consumes clotting factors and platelets, normal clotting is disrupted and severe bleeding can occur from various sites.> DIC can occur in the following conditions: Solid tumors and blood cancers (particularly acute promyelocytic leukemia) Obstetric complications: abruptio placentae, pre-eclampsia or eclampsia, amniotic fluid embolism, retained intrauterine fetal demise, septic abortion, post partum haemorrhage Massive tissue injury: severe trauma, burns, hyperthermia, rhabdomyolysis, extensive surgery Sepsis or Severe infection of any kind (infections by nearly all microorganisms can cause DIC, though bacterial infections are the most common): bacterial (Gram-negative and Gram-positive sepsis), viral, fungal, or protozoan infections Transfusion reactions (i.e., ABO incompatibility haemolytic reactions) Severe allergic or toxic reactions (i.e. snake or viper venom) Giant haemangiomas (Kasabach-Merritt syndrome) Large aortic aneurysms> Liver disease, HELLP syndrome, thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura/Haemolytic uremic syndrome, and malignant hypertension may mimic DIC but do not occur via the same pathways.

