Question: Which of the following statements are True/False? 1. Hirsutism, which is defined as androgen-dependent excessive male pattern hair growth, affects approximately 25% of women. 2. Virilization refers to a condition in which androgen levels are sufficiently high to cause additional signs and symptoms. 3. Frequently, patients with growth hormone excess (i.e., acromegaly) present with hirsutism. 4. A simple and commonly used method to grade hair growth is the modified scale of Ferriman and Gallwey. 5. Scores above 8 suggest excess androgen-mediated hair growth.
A. 1, 2, 3 True & 4, 5 false
B. 1, 3, 5 True & 2, 4 false
C. 2, 4, 5 True & 1, 3 false
D. 1, 2, 3, 4 True & 5 false
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Here statement 1 & 3 are wrong. It is actually a direct pick from harrison, an impoant topic for entrance examinations hirsutism is seen in 10% of woman. Acromegaly rarely causes hirsutism. Ref: Harrisons Principles of Medicine, 18th Edition, Pages 380-382

Question: The most common cause of renal scaring in a 3 year old child is -
A. Trauma
B. Tuberculosis
C. Vesicoureteral reflux induced pyelonephritis
D. Interstitial nephritis
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Chronic pyelonephritis is characterized by renal inflammation and scarring induced by recurrent or persistent renal infection, vesicoureteral reflux, or other causes of urinary tract obstruction. VUR is a congenital condition that results from incompetence of the ureterovesical valve due to a sho intramural segment Ref Harrison20th edition pg 234

Question: All are true about temporal arteritis except -
A. Can leads to sudden bilateral blindness
B. More corrunon in females
C. Worsen on exposure to heat
D. Mostly affects elderly
Correct Answer: C

Question: Of the various modalities used in the treatment of re-threatening effects of hyperkalemia which one of the following as the most rapid onset of action ?
A. Hemodialysis
B. Sodium bicarbonate infusion
C. Insulin and glucose infusion
D. Intravenous calcium gluconate
Correct Answer: A

Question: S2 is best appreciated in -
A. 3rd left intercostal space
B. 2nd right intercostal space
C. 4th left intercostal space
D. 5th left intercostal space
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. is 'a' i.e., 3rd left intercostal space o Best areas to auscultate for both components of the second heart sound (A2 and P2) are either the left sternal border at the level of second intercostal space (Pulmonic area) or the left sternal border at the level of third intercostal space (Erb s point).

Question: A 14-year-old girl presents with quadriparesis, facial palsy, winging of scapula and ptosis. There is h/o similar illness in father and brother but less severe. Her CPK level is also raised (500IU/L). She is probably suffering from?
A. Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy
B. Becker muscular dystrophy
C. Limb-girdle dystrophy
D. Scapulofaciohumeral dystrophy
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Facial muscle involvement is not seen with Becker and Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy Emery Dreifuss and Becker are XLR disease so can't be present in a girl child. Hence by exclusion the diagnosis is Dx: Scapulo-Faciohumeraldystrophy. Facio-Scapulo-humeral dystrophy Autosomal dominant inheritance and has an onset in childhood or young adulthood. Facial weakness is the initial manifestation-->inability to smile, whistle or fully close the eyes. Weakness of the shoulder girdles-->makes arm elevation difficult. Scapular winging becomes apparent with attempts at abduction and forward movement of the arms. The serum CK level may be normal or mildly elevated. No specific treatment is available, ankle-foot ohoses are helpful for foot-drop.

Question: Rescue P.C.I is done for which of the following?
A. Persistent chest pain with ST elevation > 60 min after thrombolysis
B. Persistent chest pain with ST elevation > 30 min after thrombolysis
C. Persistent Chest pain with ST elevation >90 min after thrombolysis
D. Pain with ST elevation for >120minutes after thrombolysis
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Option C = Rescue P.C.I. After thrombolysis ST Elevation begin to reduce If ST Elevation persisting in spite of thrombolysis. So it's failure of thrombolysis | within 90 minutes Rescue PCI Types of PCI Primary PCI done for STEMI (Door to device time < 90 minutes). Delayed PCI done for Unstable Angina NSTEMI Rescue PCI Failure of thrombolysis (within 90 minutes).

Question: Which of the following is a poor prognostic factor for childhood ALL.
A. Total Leukocyte count 4000-100,000
B. Age < 2 years
C. Testicular involvement
D. Blasts in peripheral smear
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Answer is C (Testicular involvement) Testicular involvement / enlargement is a typical poor prognostic factor for childhood ALL Age < 2 years versus Testicular Involvement Typically Age < 1 year is considered a poor prognostic factor Although Age < 2 year has been mentioned as a poor prognostic factor in ceain textbooks including Hoffman's Hematology (4th/1158) most textbooks use the criteria of Age < 1 year to define a poor prognostic factor Since testicular involvement provided amongst the option is an established poor prognostic factor, this is selected as the single best answer of choice.

Question: Antiboiotic Prophylaxis for infective endocarditis is indicated in:
A. Isolated secundum ASD
B. Mitral valve prolapse without regurgitation
C. Prior coronary aery bypass graft
D. Coarctation of aoa
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Answer is D (Coarctation of Aoa) Coarctation of Aoa is a high risk cardiac lesion fior the development of infective endocarditis and an indication fir antibiotic prophyloxis.

Question: Which of the following may be seen in second degree Hea block (select three options):
A. Change in QRS complex morphology
B. Atrial rate more than ventricular rate
C. Prolonged conduction time
D. All of the above
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Answer is A, B, and C Second degree AV block (Type I and /or Type II) may be associated with prolonged conduction time (prolonged PR interval), Atrial rate more than ventricular rate and change in QRS complex morphology (Tipe II). Name Rhythm Rate (beats/minute) P waves (lead II) PR Interval QRS complex First-degree atrio- ventricular (AV) block Regular That of underlying sinus rhythm; both atrial and ventricular rates will be the same Sinus origin: one P wave to each QRS complex Prolonged (more than 0.20 second); remains constant Normal (0.10 second or less) Second-degree AV Atrial: regular Atrial: that of Sinus origin Varies; progressively Normal (0.10 block, Mobitz I Ventricular: irregular underlying sinus rhythm lengthens until a P wave isn't conducted second or less) Ventricular: depends on number of impulses conducted through AV node: will he less than atrial rate (P wave occurs without the QRS cmplex); a pause follows the dropped QRS complex Second-degree AV Atrial: regular Atrial: that of Sinus origin: two or Normal or Normal if block at block, Mobitz II ventricular: usually underlying sinus three P waves prolonged; remains level of bundle of regular, but may be rhythm (sometimes more) constant His; irregular if Ventricular: depends before each QRS conductions ratios vary on number of Impulses conducted through AV node; will be less than atrial rate complex bundle branches Third-degree AV block Atrial: regular Atrial: that of Sinus P waves with Varies greatly Normal if block at Ventricular: regular underlying sinus rhythm Ventricular:40 to 60 if paced by AV junction; 30 to 40 (sometimes less) if paced by ventricles; will be less than atrial rate no constant relationship to the QRS complex; P waves found hidden in QRS complexes and T waves level of AV node or bundle of His; wide if block in bundle branches No constant Relationship between P wave and QRS complex is a feature of Third degree or complete hea block. One P wave to each QRS complex is a feature of First degree block

Question: A 40-year old diabetic patient presents with proptosis of one eye and black eschar over palate. The likely organism is :
A. Pseudomonas
B. Candida
C. E. coli
D. Mucor
Correct Answer: D

Question: Coloured urine is not seen in :
A. Quinine
B. Rifampcin
C. Nitrofurantoin
D. Pyridium
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Answer is A (Quinine) Quinine is not associated with discoloured urine.

Question: Investigations in a clinically suspected case of tuberculosis -
A. Mantoux (in children)
B. Sputum AFB
C. Bactec
D. All of the above
Correct Answer: D

Question: Flipped LDH indicating Myocardial Infarction is represented by:
A. LDH-1> LDH-2
B. LDH-2 > LDH-1
C. LDH-4 > LDH-5
D. LDH-5 > LDH-4
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: When LDH-1 is greater than LDH-2, it is referred to as flipped LDH and is indicative of MI. LDH-1 isoenzyme is found primarily in hea muscle and is lesser in concentration than the LDH-2 Isoenzyme which is primarily found in RBC. When the concentration of LDH-1 is observed to be greater than LDH2. It is referred to as flipped LDH and is indicative of Myocardial infarction. LDH has five isoenzymes: LDH-1 LDH-1 is found primarily in hea muscle 17% to 27% LDH-2 LDH-2 is primarily found in Red blood cells 27% to 37% LDH-3 LDH-3 is highest in the lung 18% to 25% LDH-4 LDH-4 is highest in the kidney, placenta, and pancreas 3% to 8% LDH-5 LDH-5 is highest in the liver and skeletal muscle 0% to 5% The LDH test helps determine the location of tissue damage. Thus in Normal ratios LDH-1 is less than LDH-2 and LDH-5 is less than LDH-4. When LDH-1 is greater than LDH-2: It is referred to as flipped LDH. It is indicative of MI. When your LDH-5 is greater than your LDH-4: It could mean damage to the liver or liver disease. This includes cirrhosis and hepatitis. Ref: Harrisons 19th edition

Question: Which of the following is the most specific and sensitive screening test for renovascular hypeension?
A. HRCT
B. CT Angiography
C. Captopril enhanced radionucleotide scan
D. Doppler ultrasound of renal aeries
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Hypeension due to an occlusive lesion of a renal aery is renovascular hypeensionIn the initial stages, the mechanism of hypeension generally is related to activation of the renin-angiotensin system. Obstruction of the renal aery leads to decreased renal perfusion pressure, thereby stimulating renin secretion. Over time, possibly as a consequence of secondary renal damage, this form of hypeension may become less renin-dependent.As a screening test, renal blood flow may be evaluated with a radionuclide -ohoiodohippurate (OIH) scan, or glomerular filtration rate may be evaluated with a - diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid (DTPA) scan before and after a single dose of captopril (or another ACE inhibitor).Contrast aeriography remains the "gold standard" for evaluation and identification of renal aery lesions.Harrison 19e pg: 1618

Question: A 63 year old man presents with a triad of angina, syncope and congestive hea failure. Which of the following valvular hea lesion can be suspected-
A. antral stenosis
B. Tricuspid regurgitation
C. Aoic stenosis
D. Aoic regurgitation
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Even severe AS may exist for many years without producing any symptoms because of the ability of the hyperophied LV to generate the elevated intraventricular pressures required to maintain a normal stroke volume. Most patients with pure or predominant AS have gradually increasing obstruction over years, but do not become symptomatic until the sixth to eighth decades. Exeional dyspnea, angina pectoris, and syncope are the three cardinal symptoms. Dyspnea results primarily from elevation of the pulmonary capillary pressure caused by elevations of LV diastolic pressures secondary to reduced left ventricular compliance and impaired relaxation. Angina pectoris usually develops somewhat later and reflects an imbalance between the augmented myocardial oxygen requirements and reduced oxygen availability. Exeional syncope may result from a decline in aerial pressure caused by vasodilation in the exercising muscles and inadequate vasoconstriction in nonexercising muscles in the face of a fixed CO, or from a sudden fall in CO produced by an arrhythmia. ( Harrison&;s principle of internal medicine,18th edition,pg no.1939 )

Question: Usually associated with parvovirus B19 infection in those with hereditary spherocytosis-
A. Mild to moderate splenomegaly
B. Aplastic crisis
C. Gallstones
D. Hemolytic crisis
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. is 'b' i.e., Aplastic crisis o Parvovirus B19 selectively infects erythroidprecursors and is the most common aetiological agent that induces aplastic crisis in patients with hereditary spherocytosis (and other Hemolytic disorders).Transient aplastic crisiso Persons with decreased erythrocytes caused by conditions such as iron deficiency anemia, human immunodeficiency virus sickle cell disease, spherocytosis or thalassemia are at risk of transient aplastic crisis if infected with parvovirus B19.o The virus causes a cessation of erythrocyte production,o Parvovirus infection may be the first manifestation in HS.o It begins with reticulocytosis and thrombocytosis.

Question: A patient with cushinoid features presents with hemoptysis; he shows no response to dexamethasone suppression test; most likely diagnosis here is:
A. Adrenal hyperplasia
B. Adrenal adenoma
C. Ca lung with ectopic ACTH production
D. Pituitary microadenoma
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Answer is C (Ca lung with ectopic ACTH production); Lack of suppression to dexamethasone challenge (ACTH producing tumor) and presence of hemoptysis (Carcinoma lung) in a patient with Cushinoid features suggests a diagnosis of Carcinoma lung with ectopic ACTH secretion. As a method of diagnostic workup of any patient with suspected Cushings we screen the patient with plasma coisol levels at 8:00 a.m. in the morning. Those with increased coisol levels are subjected to a dexamethasone supression test. In the given question there is lack of suppression to dexamethasone challenge so option (d) is out. Out of the choices remaining the presence of hemoptysis points towards the diagnosis of carcinoma lung with ectopic ACTH.

Question: Which test is not useful in a patient with history of Syncopal attack?
A. Electrophysiological testing
B. Tilt Table testing
C. PET Scan
D. Holter monitoring
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Answer is C (PET Scan) : PET scan has- not been mentioned as a test to investigate syncope in Harrisons text. It is the single best answer of exclusion. Electrophysiological tests and 24 hour ECG Holter monitoring are indicated in patients where history suggests a cardiac disease. Upright tilt table testing is indicated for suspected neurogenic / vasodepressor syncope in patients with normal history / examination. Invasive Cardiac Electrophysiologic testing : provides diagnostic and prognostic information regarding Sinus Node function, AV conduction and Supraventricular and Ventricular arrhythmia. Holter monitor : provides 24 - 48 hours monitoring of ECG rhythm on an outpatient basis and is indicated for detection of conduction abnormalities. Upright tilt table testing : Is a test for vasodepressor / neurogenic syncope in patients with normal history / examination. In susceptible patients upright tilt at an angle between 60deg to 80deg for 30 to 60 minutes induces a vasovagal episode. Indications for Table Tilt test include : Recurrent syncope - Single syncope episode that caused injury - Single syncope event in high risk setting (pilot, commercial vehicle driver) Syncope The choice of diagnostic test should be guided by the history and physical examination For All patients Serum electrolytes Glucose Haematocrit

Question: One of the constituents of the commonly used metered dose inhalers in bronchial asthma which is an air pollutant & dangerous to earth's stratosphere is -
A. Flurocarbons
B. Salbutamol
C. Ozone
D. Oxygen
Correct Answer: A

Question: Mycosis fungoides which is not true:
A. It is the most common form of cutaneous lymphoma.
B. Pautriers microabscess.
C. Indolent course and easily amenable to treatment.
D. Erythroderma seen and spreads to peripheral.
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Mycosis Fungoides:
Mycosis fungoides is synonymous with Cutaneous T cell lymphoma.

Question: A 74-year-old woman develops occipital headache, vomiting, and dizziness. She looks unwell, her blood pressure is 180/100 mm Hg, pulse is 70/min, and respirations are 30/min. She is unable to sit or walk because of unsteadiness. Over the next few hours, she develops a decline in her level of consciousness.For the above patient with altered level of consciousness, select the most likely diagnosis.
A. basal ganglia hemorrhage
B. cerebellar hemorrhage
C. pontine hemorrhage
D. lobar intracerebral hemorrhage
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Cerebellar hemorrhage, when mild, may present with only headache, vomiting, and ataxia of gait. Patients may complain of dizziness or vertigo. The eyes may be deviated to the side opposite the hemorrhage. Nystagmus is not common, but an ipsilateral sixth nerve palsy can occur. This is the only type of intracerebral hemorrhage that commonly benefits from surgical intervention.

Question: Features of neurogenic shock are
A. ↑Peripheral resistance ↓ cardiac output
B. ↑ Venous return ↑ cardiac output
C. ↓Peripheral resistence↓cardiac output
D. Venoconstriction ↓cardiac output
Correct Answer: C

Question: All of the following are ACTH independent Cushing syndrome except :
A. Pituitary adenoma
B. Adrenal hyperplasia
C. Adrenocoical carcinoma
D. McCune Albright Syndrome
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: ACTH dependent Cushing syndrome is caused by : ACTH producing pituitary adenoma Ectopic ACTH Bronchial or pancreatic carcinoid Small cell cancer of lung Medullary carcinoma of thyroids Pheochromocytoma ACTH Independent Cushing syndrome is caused by : Adrenocoical adenoma/ carcinoma Primary pigmented nodular adrenal disease Adrenal hyperplasia McCune Albright Syndrome Petrosal/Peripheral ACTH ratio > 2 indicates the presence of a pituitary adenoma-secreting ACTH. NOTE: Overall the most common cause of Cushing's syndrome is Iatrogenic steroids but if asked regarding ACTH dependent cause then answer should be given as Pituitary adenoma.

Question: All of the following are features of Devic's syndrome (neuromyelitis optica), except?
A. Separate attacks of acute optic neuritis and myelitis
B. Optic neuritis is either unilateral or bilateral
C. Brain MRI is typically normal
D. It has a fulminant demyelinating process and progress to death in 1-2 year
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Devic's disease is a variant of multiple sclerosis. Fulminant demyelinating process is seen with another variant called Marburg's variant.

Question: Platypnea is seen with?
A. Hepato-pulmonary syndrome
B. Hepato-renal syndrome
C. Renal aery stenosis
D. Kyphoscoliosis
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Platypnea: Increase dyspnea on sitting position Seen in 1. Atrial myxoma 2. Hepatopulmonary syndrome

Question: A female child with virilization, hypertension with low plasma renin diagnosis is :
A. 21α hydroxylase deficiency
B. 11 β hydroxylase deficiency
C. 3β hydroxylase deficiency
D. Conn’s syndrome
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: 9] Congenital adrenal hyperplasia represents a group of autosomal recessive inherited, metabolic errors,
each characterized by decency or total lack of a particular enzyme involved in the biosynthesis of cortical steroids,
Steroidogenesis is then channelled into other pathways leading to increased production of androgens,
which accounts for virilization.
Simultaneously, the decency of cortisol results in increased secretion of ACTH resulting in adrenal hyperplasia.
Following enzymes are implicated in the congenital adrenal hyperplasia 21 α hydroxylase decency (partial or complete) 17 α hydroxylase deficiency 11β hydroxylase
deficiency 21 α hydroxylase deficiency
• Two forms of this deficiency include -
A. Salt-wasting adrenogenital ism
B. Simple Virilizing adrenogenital ism
A) Salt-wasting syndrome (complete lack) The salt wasting syndrome results from complete lack of 21 hydroxylases.
There is no synthesis of mineralocorticoids and glucocorticoids in the adrenal cortex.
Decreased mineralocorticoids causes marked sodium loss in the urine, resulting in hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, acidosis and hypotension.
Because of the enzyme block, there is increased formation of 17 - hydroxyprogesterone, which is then shunted into the production of testosterone.
This may cause virilism (pseudo-hermaphroditism) in female infants.
That is (XX) Female with 21 hydroxylase deficiency develops ovaries,
female ductal structures and external male genitalia. But in the male child, the effect of increased testosterone will not be manifested at the time of birth.
The complete21 hydroxylase deficiency or salt wasting syndrome usually comes to light only after the birth because in utero the electrolytes and uids
can be maintained by maternal kidneys. Males with this disorder comes to clinical attention 5 to 15 days later because of salt losing crisis while
females come to attention soon after the birth because of the virilization.
B) Simple Virilizing adrenogenital syndrome (Partial deficiency) Occurs in individuals
with partial deficiency of 21 hydroxylases Less severe deficiency of mineralocorticoid, is sufficient for salt reabsorption, but the lowered glucocorticoid fails to cause
feedback inhibition of ACTH secretion.
Thus level of aldosterone is mildly reduced, testosterone is increased and ACTH elevated with resultant adrenal hyperplasia.
11B hydroxylase deficiency-. Rare Leads to decreased cortisol and increased ACTH.
This, in turn, leads to the accumulation of DOC (deoxycorticosterone) and 11 deoxycortisol
both of which are strong mineralocorticoids. This results in increased sodium retention by the kidneys and hypertension, hypokalemia.
Patients also develop virilization due to androgen excess. 17 α hydroxylase deficiency - Patients with deficiency of 17 hydroxylases also have impaired cortisol production,
increased ACTH and secondary increased DOC.
These patients, however, cannot synthesize normal amount of androgens and estrogens.
This is because the gene that codes for 17 α hydroxylase is the same for the enzyme in the adrenal cortex and the gonads and the decency is same in both organs.
Because of decreased sex hormones, genotypic females develop primary amenorrhoea and fail to develop secondary sex characteristics while genotypic
males will present as pseudohermaphrodite.
3 β hydroxylase deficiency 3-β hydroxylase deficiency is a rare genetic disorder of steroid biosynthesis that results
in decreased production of all three groups of adrenal steroids which include mineralocorticoid, glucocorticoid and sex steroids.
Decreased mineralocorticoid secretion
results in varying degrees of salt wasting in both males and females.
Decent androgen production results in ambiguous genitalia in males
The usual presentation is a male child with ambiguous genitalia and severe salt wasting. Sometimes it may also occur in females

Question: Middle aged female with mass in sella turcica hormone increased is -
A. Prolactin
B. Thyroxine
C. Extrogen
D. ADH
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: The sella turcica is a saddle shaped depression of the sphenoid bone.
It forms the caudal border of the pituitary gland. Sella turcica is an anatomically complex area with a number of different potential pathologies especially neoplastic process.
Pathologies of sella turcica can lead to important clinical presentations such as hormonal imbalances from pathologies affecting the pituitary gland and neurological symptoms from the mass effect.
Sella turcica is critically located as several structures pass close to it due to compression of the adjacent structures.

Important anatomical structures related to sella

Optic chiasm
Pituiatry gland
Internal carotids​
Gavernous sinus and cranial nerves
Sphenoid sinuses

Question: . Sulphasalazine is NOT used for the treatment of-
A. Crohn's disease
B. Rheumatoid ahritis
C. Sarcoidosis
D. Ulcerative colitis
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Sulhasalazine is not used for treatment of sarcoidosis As a treatment for sarcoidosis, these drugs are most likely to be effective in people who have skin symptoms or a high level of calcium in their blood. Hydroxychloroquine (Plaquenil) and chloroquine (Aralen) are antimalarial drugs that are used to treat sarcoidosis Ref Davidson 23rd edtion pg 981

Question: All of the following are true about Asthma, Except:
A. Charcol Leydin crystals may be seen in sputum
B. Reversible Airflow obstruction is a characteristic feature
C. Large airways are involved
D. Small airways are not involved
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Answer is D (Small airways are not involved): Asthma involves both large and small airways but alveoli are not involved Charcot Leyden crystals may be seen in sputum: Pathology by woolf lsr (1998)/434 Sputum from Asthmatics show ceain characteristic features, including charcot leydencrystas The microscopically identifiable features described in sputum are three 'C's Charcot Leyden crystals - Derived from granules of eosnophils andfbund only in Asthma Curshmann spirals - Curiously twisted casts of airways : Whorls of shed epethelium Creola bodies - Clumps of cells or isolated metaplastic cells Reversible Airflow obstruction is a charachteristic feature (Davidsons 18th/55, 326) Reversible Bronchoconstriction is the hallmark of Asthma The charachteristic feature of Asthma is Intermittent and Reversible airflow obstruction. Narrowing of airways is usually reversible, but in some patients with chronic asthma there may be an element of irreversible airflow obstruction Asthma involves both large and small airways Asthma involves Large and small airways hut not alveoli - 'Allergic Diseases: Diagnosis Treatment' 3rd/ 120 The large and small airways are both involved in Asthma -'Childhood Asthma: Diagnosis, Treatment & Management' r/15 Intermittent Asthma responds better to bronchodilator therapy than persistant Asthma Bronchodilators are effective drugs for the treatment of acute exacerbations or intermittent episodes of Asthma but they are not sufficient to control asthma in patients with persistant symptoms (persistant asthma) Bronchodilators are not sufficient to control Asthma in patients with persistant symptoms'

Question: All of the following are well recognised predisposing factors for adult respiratory distress syndrome, except:
A. Multiple blood transfusions
B. Septicemia
C. Status asthmaticus
D. Toxic gas inhalation
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Status asthmaticus is an example of type 2 respiratory failure while ARDS is type 1 respiratory failure. All other choices lead to cytokines release and damage the alveoli leading to ARDS.

Question: Sign of diabetic ketoacidosis is-
A. Loss of sweating
B. Depression
C. Dehydration
D. Absent deep tendon reflexes
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Physical findings of diabetic ketoacidosis are tachycardia, dehydration/hypotension, hypothermia, tachypnea/Kussmaul respirations/ respiratory distress, abdominal tenderness (may resemble acute pancreatitis or surgical abdomen), lethargy/obtundation/cerebral edema/possibly coma. Reference : page 2418 Harrison's Principles of Internal Medicine 19th edition

Question: All are used in the management of head injury patient except?
A. Neuromuscular paralysis
B. Nor-epinephrine
C. Sedation
D. Glucocoicoids
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Glucocoicoids are useful for management of vasogenic edema from tumor or brain abscess. In contrast glucocoicoids are avoided in case of head trauma, ischemic and hemorrhagic stroke. Norepinephrine or pressor therapy is used to maintain a MAP to maintain CPP> 60 mm Hg. Sedation is done with propofol or midazolam. Neuromuscular paralysis will be necessary and the patient will need ventilator suppo. This will ensure securing the airway and keeping pCO2 between 30-35mmHg.

Question: Not a premalignant condition: March 2005
A. Retinitis pigmentosa
B. Crohn's disease
C. Ulcerative colitis
D. Leukoplakia
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. A: Retinitis pigmentosaGIT premalignant conditionsOf the four major primary small-bowel tumors (adenocarcinomas, lymphomas, carcinoid, and leiomyosarcomas), adenocarcinomas and lymphomas are associated with diseases that seem to increase the risk of developing these malignancies.Immunoproliferative small intestinal disease and celiac disease, are thought to predispose patients to the development of primary lymphoma.Increased risk is also associated with conditions, such as immunodeficiency syndromes, nodular lymphoid hyperplasia, Crohn's disease, the gastrointestinal polyposis syndromes, hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer, neurofibromatosis, long-standing ileostomy, and urinary diversion procedures.Patient with long standing ulcerative colitis are at risk of developing colonic epithelial dysplaia and carcinoma.Oral cavity premalignant conditionsMany oral SCCs develop from premalignant conditions of the oral cavity.A wide array of conditions have been implicated in the development of oral cancer, including leukoplakia, erythroplakia, palatal lesion of reverse cigar smoking, oral lichen planus, oral submucous fibrosis, discoid lupus erythematosus, and hereditary disorders such as dyskeratosis congenital and epidermolysis bullosaOther pre-malignant conditions include actinic keratosis, Barrett's esophagus and cervical dysplasia.

Question: Which of the following is false about Takotsubo Cardiomyopathy
A. Due to major catecholamine discharge
B. Lv Contractile dysfunction
C. Presents with acute chest pain
D. Echo never reverts back to normal
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Echo comes back to normal in two weeks.

Question: In rheumatic heart disease, infective endocarditis is detected by echocardiogram and the largest vegetations seen are due to-
A. Streptococcus viridans
B. Staphylococcus aureus
C. Candida albicans
D. Salmonella typhi
Correct Answer: C

Question: Dispropoionately increased blood urea levels compared to serum creatinine (urea creatinine ratio 20:1) can be seen in the following except -
A. Prerenal failure
B. CCF
C. Intrinsic renal failure
D. Hypovolemia
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Intrinsic or intrarenal acute renal failure (ARF) occurs when direct damage to the kidneys causes a sudden loss in kidney function. The most common causes of intrinsic acute renal failure are acute tubular necrosis (ATN), acute glomerulonephritis (AGN), and acute interstitial nephritis (AIN) . Ref Harrison20th edition pg 236

Question: Oesophageal motility disorder are best diagnosed by?
A. Barium studies
B. Endoscopy
C. 24 hour pH monitoring
D. Manometry
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Answer is B (Endoscopy): Dysphagia for solids alone suggests a probable mechanical cause for dysphagia such as carcinoma, stricture or esophageal web. The investigation of choice for such cases is Endoscopy.

Question: Good pasture's syndrome is characterized by all of the following, except:
A. Glomerulonephritis
B. Leucocytoclastic Vasculitis
C. Diffuse alveolar haemorrhage
D. Presence of antibodies to Basement Membrane
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Answer is B (Leucocytoclastic Vasculitis) Leucocytoclastic vasculitis is not a typical feature of Good pasture's syndrome Triad of Goodpasture's syndrome (Ferri 's Color Atlas & Text of Clinical Medicine) Glomerulonephritisdeg (RPGN; crescents) Pulmonary HaemorrhageQ (Diffuse Alveolar Haemorrhage) Antibodies to basement membrane antigensQ (Anti-GBM antibodies)

Question: Reverse Coarctation is seen in
A. Giant cell arteritis
B. Takayasu arteritis
C. Polyarteritis nodosa
D. Microscopic polyangitis
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Reverse Coarctation ;weak or absent pulse in upper limb + pulse present in lower limb.

Question: A 55 year old man, a chronic smoker is brought to emergency with history of polyuria, polydipsia, nausea and altered sensorium for last two days. He had been diagnosed as having squamous cell carcinoma of lung two months prior to this. On examination, he was lethargic and confused. An ECG was normal except for a narrowed QT interval. Which one of the following is the most likely metabolic abnormality ?
A. Hypematremia
B. Hypercalcemia
C. Hypokalemia
D. Hyponatremia
Correct Answer: B

Question: Actinomycosis is commonly seen in -
A. Tibia
B. Mandible
C. Scapula
D. Femur
Correct Answer: B

Question: A young girl presents with abdominal pain and a recent change in bowel habit, with passage of mucus in stool. There is no associated blood in stool and symptoms are increased with stress. The most likely diagnosis is-
A. Irritable bowel syndrome
B. Ulcerative colitis
C. Crohn's disease
D. Amebiasis
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Childhood Chronic ill health in childhood or adolescent IBD may result in growth failure, metabolic bone disease and delayed pubey. Loss of schooling and social contact, as well as frequent hospitalisation, can have impoant psychosocial consequences.Treatment is similar to that described for adults and may require glucocoicoids, immunosuppressive drugs, biological agents and surgery. Monitoring of height, weight and sexual development is crucial. Children with IBD should be managed by specialised paediatric gastroenterologists and transitioned to adult care in dedicated clinics . Pregnancy A women's ability to become pregnant is adversely affected by active IBD. Pre-conceptual counselling should focus on optimising disease control. During pregnancy, the rule of thirds applies: roughly one-third of women improve, one-third get worse and one-third remain stable with active disease. In the post-paum period, these changes sometimes reverse spontaneously. Drug therapy, including aminosalicylates, glucocoicoids Delayed growth and pubeal development: chronic active inflammation, malabsorption, malnutrition and long-term glucocoicoids contribute to sho stature and delayed development, with physical and psychological consequences. * Metabolic bone disease: more common with chronic disease beginning in childhood, resulting from chronic inflammation, dietary deficiency and malabsorption of calcium and vitamin D. * Drug side-effects and adherence issues: young people are more likely to require azathioprine or biological therapy than adults. Poor adherence to therapy is more common than with adults, as younger patients may feel well, lack self-motivation to adhere and believe that drugs are ineffective or cause side-effects. * Loss of time from education: physical illness, surgery, fatigue in chronic inflammatory bowel disease, privacy and dignity issues, and social isolation may all contribute. * Emotional difficulties: may result from challenges in coping with illness, problems with forming interpersonal relationships, and issues relating to body image or sexual function. Ref Davidson edition23rd pg823

Question: Storage form of thyroid hormone-
A. Tri-iodo tyrosine
B. Tri - iodo thyronine
C. Thyroglobulin
D. Di-iodo tyrosine
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: The synthesis and storage of thyroid hormones occurs between the follicular cells and the colloid. The storage form of thyroid hormone is thyroglobulin. Thyroglobulin is a large glycoprotein synthesized in the follicular cells and has a molecular weight of around 650 000 with about 140 tyrosine residues, depending on the form of thyroglobulin. Approximately one quaer of these residues is iodinated at the apical-colloid interface. Once iodinated, thyroglobulin is taken up into the colloid of the follicle where, still incorporated in the protein, a coupling reaction between pairs of iodinated tyrosine molecules occurs. The coupling of two tyrosine residues each iodinated at two positions (di-iodotyrosine, DIT) produces tetra-iodothyronine or thyroxine (T4 ) whilst the combination of DIT with mono-iodotyrosine (MIT) produces tri-iodothyronine (T3 ). Such coupling can occur within a single molecule of thyroglobulin or between dimerized molecules of the protein. This coupling is catalyzed by TPO. Thyroid hormones are stored in this state and are only released when the thyroglobulin molecule is taken back up into the follicular cells. Stimulated by TSH, thyroglobulin droplets are captured by the follicular cells by a process of pinocytosis. Fusion of the droplets with lysosomes results in hydrolysis of the thyroglobulin molecules and release of T3 and T4. Reference : page 2285 Harrison's Principles of Internal Medicine 19th edition

Question: ARDS true?
A. Type 2 respiratory failure
B. Lung compliance decreased
C. Increase in diffusion capacity
D. none
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: ARDS is a clinical syndrome of severe dyspnoea of rapid onset, hypoxaemia and diffuse pulmonary infiltrates leading to respiratory failure.ARDS is characterised by Po2/Fio2(inspiratory O2 fraction)<200 mmHg.There will be no hypercapnia, so the patient will have type 1 respiratory failure. 
There will be a stiff-lung syndrome with collapse and decreased compliance of the lungs due to loss of surfactant.

Question: In a normal healthy person the arterial oxygen is considered satisfactory if SPO2 is more than
A. 80
B. 85
C. 90
D. Any of the above
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. c (90) (Ref H-17th/l590-91; pg. A-15)In a normal healthy person the arterial oxygen is considered satisfactory if SP02 is more than 90.Arterial O2 tensionPaO212.7 +- 0.7 kPa (95 +- 5 mm Hg)Arterial CO2 tensionPaCO25.3 +- 0.3 kPa (40 +- 2 mm Hg)Arterial O2 saturationSaO20.97 +- 0.02 (97 +- 2%)Arterial blood pHpH7.40 +- 0.02Arterial bicarbonateHCO3-24 + 2 mEq/LBase excessBE0 +- 2 mEq/LDiffusing capacity for carbon monoxide (single breath)DLCO0.42 mL CO/s/mm Hg (25 mL CO/min/mm Hg)Dead space volumeVD2 mL/kg body wtPhysio dead space; dead space-tidal vol ratioVD/VTKnow at rest & exercise(a) Rest < 35% VT(b) Exercise < 20% VTAlveolar-arterial difference for O2P(A -a) O2< 2.7 kPa (20 mm Hg)Educational Point# Alveolar hypoventilation exists by definition when arterial PC02 (PaC02) increases above the normal range of 37-43 mm Hg, but in clinically important hypoventilation syndromes PaC02 is generally in the range of 50-80 mm Hg.# A decrease in the Anion Gap can be due to:- an increase in unmeasured cations;- the addition to the blood of abnormal cations, such as lithium (lithium intoxication) or cationic immunoglobulins (plasma cell dyscrasias);- a reduction in the major plasma anion albumin concentration (nephrotic syndrome); (A fall in serum albumin by 1 g/dL from the normal value decreases the anion gap by 2.5 mEq/L).- a decrease in the effective anionic charge on albumin by acidosis; or- hyperviscosity and severe hyperlipidemia.

Question: A patient present with dysphagia of 4 weeks duration. Now he is able to swallow liquid food only. Which of the following is the one investigation to be done:
A. Barium studies are the best to be done
B. Upper GI endoscopy is to be done
C. CT scan is needed
D. Esophageal manometry
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Answer is B (Upper GI endoscopy is to be done) The patient is presenting with new onset dysphagia for solids alone (able to swallow liquids). This suggests dysphagia due to mechanical obstruction (carcinoma, stricture, web) which is best diagnosed by endoscopy. Note: Barium swallow is the recommended initial investigation Endoscopy is the investigation of choice.

Question: Fleeting skin lesions are often present in patients with:
A. Viral hepatitis B
B. Acute cholangitis
C. Viral hepatitis A
D. Carcinoma head of pancreas
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Fleeting skin lesions are often presents in patients with hepatitis B. Ref: Schiff's diseases of liver, Edition -11, Page - 3.

Question: A patient presented with ahritis and purpura. Laboratory examination showed monoclonal and polyclonal cryoglobulins. Histopathology showed deposits of cryoglobulins around the vessels. The patient should be tested for which of the following ?
A. HBV
B. HCV
C. EBV
D. Parvovious
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Hepatitis C This is caused by an RNA flavivirus. Acute symptomatic infection with hepatitis C is rare. Most individuals are unaware of when they became infected and are identified only when they develop chronic liver disease. Eighty per cent of individuals exposed to the virus become chronically infected and late spontaneous viral clearance is rare. There is no active or passive protection against hepatitis C virus (HCV). Hepatitis C infection is usually identified in asymptomatic individuals screened because they have risk factors for infection, such as previous injecting drug use , or have incidentally been found to have abnormal liver blood tests. Although most people remain asymptomatic until progression to cirrhosis occurs, fatigue can complicate chronic infection and is unrelated to the degree of liver damage. Hepatitis C is the most common cause of what used to be known as 'non-A, non-B hepatitis'. If hepatitis C infection is left untreated, progression from chronic hepatitis to cirrhosis occurs over 20-40 years. Risk factors for progression include male gender, immunosuppression (such as co-infection with HIV), prothrombotic states and heavy alcohol misuse. Not everyone with hepatitis C infection will necessarily develop cirrhosis but approximately 20% do so within 20 years. Once cirrhosis has developed, the 5- and 10-year survival rates are 95% and 81%, respectively. One-quaer of people with cirrhosis will develop complications within 10 years and, once complications such as ascites develop, the 5-year survival is around 50%. Once cirrhosis is present, 2-5% per year will develop primary hepatocellular carcinoma. Ref Davidson edition23rd pg877

Question: Calculate the deficit for a 60 kg person,with Hb - 5 g/dl add 1000 mg for iron stores.
A. 1500
B. 2500
C. 3500
D. 4000
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Iron deficit = Bodyweight(kg) x 2.3 x (15 - Hb) + 1000
      = 60 x 2.3 x (15 - 5) + 1000
      = 2380 (close to 2500)

Question: Which of the following is not a cause of glomerular proteinuria?
A. Diabetes Mellitus
B. Amyloidosis
C. Multiple myeloma
D. Nil Lesion
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Multiple myeloma is characterized by tubular proteinuria. The Bence Jones proteins induce tubular damage Increased beta-2-microglobulin levels in urine is an prognostic indicator of Multiple myeloma Diabetes Mellitus and amyloidosis lead to damage to basement membrane of the kidney leading to glomerular proteinuria in form of albuminuria Nil Lesion is also called as minimal change disease and presents as glomerular cause of proteinuria leading to nephrotic presentation . Multiple Myeloma: SPEP will demonstrate a sharp peak ("church spire" orM band) in the gamma globulin region as shown below:

Question: Which of the following endocrine tumors is most commonly seen in MEN I ?
A. Insulinoma
B. Gastrinoma
C. Glucagonoma
D. Somatotrophinoma
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: In MEN 1 : * Gastrinoma (>50%) * Insulinoma (10-30%) * Glucagonoma (<3%) * Somatotrophinoma (25%) Reference : page 2336 Harrison's Principles of Internal Medicine 19th edition

Question: The following is the least useful investigation in multiple myeloma :
A. ESR
B. X-Ray
C. Bone scan
D. Bone marrow biopsy
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Answer is C (Bone scan) Bone scans are least useful for diagnosis of Multiple Myeloma. Cytokines secreted by myeloma cells suppress osteoblastic activity therefore typically no increased uptake is observed. In multiple myeloma the osteohlastic response to bone destruction is negligible. The bone scan therefore is often normal or may show areas of decreased uptake (photopenia).It has been found to be less useful in diagnosis than plain radiography. Ig protein /24 hour is a major ciriteria for diagnosis " align="left" height="133" width="100"> Note : Serum M component is most commonly IgG Q (IgG (53%), IgA (25%), IgD (I%) Bence Jones proteins are light chain protein only Q.

Question: prophylaxis for Pneumocystis carinii is indicated in HIV positive patents When CD4 count is-
A. <300 cells/mm3
B. < 200 cells / mm3
C. < 100 cells/mm3
D. < 50 cells / mm3
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Low CD4 count correlated with risk of PCP (p < 0.0001); 79% had CD4 counts less than 100/microl and 95% had CD4 counts less than 200/microl. Bacterial pneumonia has been linked to several HIV-related factors, including CD4 counts, having an uncontrolled viral load, and not being on antiretroviral therapy. HIV-positive people with a weak immune system, paicularly a CD4 count below 200 cells/mm3, are at greatest risk. Ref Harrison20th edition pg 1107

Question: Acute appendicitis is best diagnosed by -
A. History
B. Physical examination
C. X-ray abdomen
D. Ba meal
Correct Answer: B

Question: For Status epilepticus, treatment of choice is: September 2012
A. Ethosuximide
B. Sodium valproate
C. Lamotrigine
D. Lorazepam
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ans. D i.e. Lorazepam

Question: A four-fold increase in the titre obtained in Weil- Felix reaction is diagnostic of -
A. Rickettsial infection
B. Fungal infection
C. Spirochetal infection
D. Viral infection
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: In weil-felix test, host antibodies to various rickettsial species cause agglutination of Proteus bacteria because they cross-react with bacterial cell surface antigens. Reference: Harrison20th edition pg 1011

Question: Most common cause of Papillary necrosis is
A. Diabetes Mellitus
B. Sickle cell anaemia
C. Analgesics
D. Pyelonephritis
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Major causes of Papillary Necrosis1. Analgesic nephropathy2. Sickle cell nephropathy3. Diabetes with UTI4. Prolonged NSAID use Reference: Harrison&;s Principles of Internal Medicine; 19th edition; Chapter 340; Tubulointerstitial Diseases of the Kidney

Question: Clinical features of rheumatic fever are all except-
A. Cardiomegaly
B. Joint pains
C. ST segment elevation
D. Increased PR interval
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ref: R Alagappan - Manual of Practical Medicine 4th Edition.pg no:146-147 Rheumatic Fever Acute, recurrent, inflammatory disease, mainly of children (aged 5-15 years), typically occurring 1-5 weeks after group A streptococcal infection. Pathophysiology 1. Cross reactivity of host antistreptococcal antibodies to cardiac antigens 2. Microbe initiated autoimmune reactivity. Jones Criteria for Diagnosis of Rheumatic Fever Major Criteria Carditis Pancarditis, seen in 50-60% of patients, develops within the first 2 weeks of rheumatic fever. Pericarditis is evidenced by presence of a pericardial rub, myocarditis by tachycardia, soft S1, presence of S3 and CCF and endocarditis by the presence of Carey-Coombs' murmur (mitral diastolic murmur). Ahritis (60-75%) Flitting and fleeting type of polyahritis involving large joints with no residual deformity is seen in 60-75% of patients and occurs early in rheumatic fever. Jaccod's ahritis: Ulnar detion of 4th and 5th finger with flexion at metacarpophalangeal joints is the only residual deformity seen in rheumatic polyahritis. Subcutaneous Nodules Non-tender nodules are seen over bony prominences like elbows, shin, occiput, spine in 3-5% of patients and occur 3-6 weeks after onset of rheumatic fever. Patients who have subcutaneous nodules almost always have carditis. Erythema Marginatum (< 5% and evanescent) Macular lesions with an erythematous rim and central clearing in a bathing suit distribution are seen in < 5% of patients and occur early in rheumatic fever. Chorea (Sydenham's Chorea) (2-30%) A neurological disorder with rapid, involuntary and purposeless non-repetitive movements with a self limiting course of 2-6 weeks is more common in females and is a late manifestation of rheumatic fever. Minor Criteria Clinical 1. Fever 2. Ahralgia 3. Previous history of rheumatic fever or rheumatic hea disease. Laboratory 1. Acute phase reactants (leucocytosis, raised ESR, C-reactive protein) 2. Prolonged PR interval in ECG (> 0.2 sec). WHO Criteria Jones major and pa of the minor criteria except prior history of rheumatic fever/rheumatic hea disease and C-reactive protein. Essential Criteria Evidence for recent streptococcal infection as evidenced by: 1. Increase in ASO titre a. > 333 Todd units (in children) b. > 250 Todd units (in adults). 2. Positive throat culture for streptococcal infection. 3. Recent history of scarlet fever. Two major (or) one major and two minor criteria, in the presence of essential criteria, is required to diagnose Acute Rheumatic Fever. A Positive Rheumatic Fever history is usually elicited in only 50% of patient with Rheumatic Hea Disease. Valve Involvement in Rheumatic Hea Disease Mitral valve alone 50% Aoic valve alone 15-20% Mitral and Aoic valves together 35-40% Mitral, Aoic and Tricuspid valves 2-3% Pulmonary valve is viually never involved. In RHD, mitral valve is most commonly involved followed by involvement of the aoic valve as the pressure gradient across the mitral valve is the greatest, followed by that across the aoic valve. So, the mitral valve is more susceptible to develop pathological changes than the aoic valve.

Question: Neurocysticercosis is treated by all the following drugs, EXCEPT -
A. Albendazole
B. Niclosamide
C. Flubendazole
D. Praziquantel
Correct Answer: B

Question: Characteristic feature of korsakoff psychosis is
A. Disorientation
B. Delirium
C. Coarse tremor
D. Amnesia
Correct Answer: D

Question: Investigation of choice in bronchiectasis is
A. Bronchoscopy
B. MRI thorax
C. HRCT lung
D. Chest X-ray
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: HRCT chest is more specific for bronchiectasis and is the imaging modality of choice for confirming the diagnosis.CT findings include airway dilation(detected as parallel "tram tracks" or as the "signet-ring sign"-a cross sectional area of the airway with a diameter at least 1.5 times that of the adjacent vessel),lack of bronchial tapering(including the presence of tubular structures within 1 cm from the pleural surface.),bronchial wall thickening in dilated airways,inspissated secretions (eg.,the " tree-in-bud" pattern ),or cysts emanating from the bronchial wall(especially pronounced in cystic bronchiectasis.) Reference:Harrison's medicine-18th edition,page no:2143.

Question: A 47-year-old man suddenly develops high fever and hypotension. He has a generalized erythematous macular rash, and over the next day, develops gangrene of his left leg. Which of the following is the most likely organism?
A. Corynebacterium diphtheriae
B. Streptococcus group C
C. Neisseria gonorrhoeae
D. Streptococcus group A
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Streptococcus group A can cause a toxic shock-like syndrome, and has been increasing in frequency in North America. Streptococcal toxic shock-like syndrome was so named because of its similarity to staphylococcal toxic shock syndrome. The illness includes fever, hypotension, renal impairment, and the respiratory distress syndrome. It is usually caused by strains that produce exotoxin. It may be associated with localized infection as well; the most common associated infection is a soft tissue infection such as necrotizing fasciitis. The mortality is high (up to 30%), usually secondary to shock and respiratory failure. The rapid progression of the disease and its high mortality demand early recognition and aggressive treatment. Management includes fluid resuscitation, pressor agents, mechanical ventilation, antibodies, and, if necrotizing fasciitis is present, surgical debridement.

Question: All of the following are seen in GH deficiency except?
A. Hyperglycemia
B. Stunting
C. Delayed bone age
D. High pitched voice
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: From late in the first year until mid-teens, poor growth and/ or shoness is the hallmark of childhood GH deficiency. It tends to be accompanied by delayed physical maturation so that bone maturation and pubey may be delayed by several years. Severe GH deficiency in early childhood also results in slower muscular development, so that gross motor milestones may be delayed. Some severely GH-deficient children have recognizable, cherubic facial features characterized by maxillary hypoplasia and forehead prominence. These children have a high pitched voice and are stunted. GH deficiency is associated with hypoglycemia. In contrast gigantism or acromegaly is associated with impaired glucose tolerance.

Question: In a family, the father has widely spaced eyes, increased facial hair and deafness. One of the three children has deafness with similar facial features. The mother is normal. Which one of the following is most likely pattern of inheritance in this case?
A. Autosomal dominant
B. Autosomal recessive
C. X-linked dominant
D. X-linked recessive
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: A i.e. Autosomal dominant (most likely) Waardenburg's Syndrome (WS) is a rare autosomal dominant syndrome characterized by pigmentary disturbances (skin, hair, iris), sensorineural hearing loss, and other developmental anomalies such as dystopia canthorum (widely spaced eyes) and blepharophimosis. The syndrome that closest matches the features provided in the question is Waardeburg syndrome type-I. This is inherited as an autosomal dominant fashion and hence is the answer of exclusion. As the question does not provide us with details as to the sex of the three children, a sex linked inheritance pattern cannot be worked out. Also the combined presentation of an affected father, unaffected mother and one affected child among three children is possible with both an autosomal dominant and an autosomal recessive inheritance pattern. In absence of any more details, the answer to this question cannot be deduced through the exploration of various permutations and combinations. How both autosomal dominant and autosomal recessive inheritance can be responsible for the above combination: Autosomal Dominant Autosomal recessive (A-affected allele and a normal allele) If the disease is transmitted in an Autosomal Dominant then :Father (affected) will be either 'AA' or 'Aa' Mother (unaffected) will be 'aa' If father is AA and mother aa, the offsprings will be 1. aA - 100% affected If father is Aa and mother aa, the offsprings will Aa - 50% affected aa - 50% not affected The scenario in the above question therefore is possible autosomal dominant inheritance if father is Aa and mother is aa (A'-affected allele and 'a' normal allele) If the disease is transmitted in an Autosomal recessive form :Father (affected) will be 'AA' Mother (unaffected) may be 'aa' or 'Aa' If father is AA and mother aa, the offsprings will be 1. aA - 100% not affected, (but carriers) If father is AA and mother Aa, the offsprings will be Aa - 50% not affected, carrier AA - 50% affected The scenario in the above question therefore is possible with autosomal recessive inheritance if father is aa and mother is Aa

Question: Drug NOT used in pulmonary hypeension is?
A. Calcium channel blocker
B. Endothelin receptor antagonist
C. Alpha blocker
D. Prostacyclin
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: alpha blockers Pulmonary hypeension General management Diuretic therapy may be useful as it relieves pulmonary edema. Anticoagulant therapy is advocated for all patients. Specific management Calcium channel blockers Patients who have substantial reductions in pulmonary aerial pressure in response to sho acting vasodilators at the time of cardiac catheterization should he initially treated with calcium channel blockers. Endothelin receptor antagonist Bostenan is a non-selective endothelium receptor antagonist, is an approved t/t ,for patients who are NYHA .functional classes III and IV. Phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors Slidenafil is used for patients who are NYHA functional classes II and Prostacyclins Iloprost is a prostacyclin analogue used in PAH patients who are NYHA functional classes III and IV. Pulmonary circulation is unique in that it accommodates a blood flow that is almost equal to that of all the other organs of body but still maintains low pressure. The factors responsible for low pressure in pulmonary circulation (even with large volume of blood) are:- - Larger diameter of pulmonary vessels due to thin wall of pulmonary aery and aerioles.

Question: Which of the following is a good prognostic factor in ALL:
A. High WBC count
B. Male sex
C. Age < 2 years
D. Hyperdiploidy
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Answer is D (Hyperdiploidy): Hyperdiploidy is associated with a good prognosis Hyperdiploidy is associated with a good prognosis Patients with hyperdiploidy (>50 chromosomes) or DNA index > 0.16 have a ourable prognosis - Age < 2 years has a poor prognosis Patients who are very young (< 2 years) and older patients (> 10 years) tend to have a worse prognosis- lthough most textbooks use the criteria of Age < 1 year to define a poor prognostic factor, Age < 2 year has been mentioned as a poor prognostic factor in ceain textbooks including Hoffman's Hematology (4th/1158) Since Hyperdiploidy provided amongst the option is an established good prognostic factor, this is selected as the single best answer of choice. High WBC count is associated with a poor prognosis Initial leukocyte count at diagnosis has proved to be an impoant prognostic factor in viually every ALL study. Different studies (textbooks) quote different values for the initial WBC count that is associated with a poor prognosis but uniformly a high WBC count carries a poor prognosis. Different text books Favourable WBC count Unourable WBC count Wintrobe's Hematology < 10,000 > 20,000 Hoffman Hematology < 50,000 > 50,000 Manual of Clinical oncology <30,000 >30,000 Inference Low WBC count High WBC count Male sex is associated with a poor prognosis 'Female patients have a rare ourable prognosis'

Question: A 26 year old female patients presents to emegency with history of consuming hair dye paraphenylenediamine . What shall be the expected outcome in such patient ?
A. Blindness
B. Nerve pathology
C. Dermatitis
D. Rhabdomyolysis
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Hair dye poisoning(Paraphenylenediamine ): Cost-effective alternative to Organophosphate poisoning Readily available to masses. Clinical manifestations are Angioedema leading to dysphasia and respiratory distress, Rhabdomyolysis, Intravascular hemolysis, Acute renal failure and hepatic necrosis. Myocarditis or fatal arrhythmia may also occur in PPD poisoning. Mainstay of management is early recognition and suppoive measures as there is no specific antidote

Question: For each extra-articular manifestation of RA, select the most likely diagnosis.Associated with increased frequency of infections.
A. Felty syndrome
B. rheumatoid vasculitis
C. episcleritis
D. Sjogren syndrome
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Felty syndrome consists of chronic RA, splenomegaly, and neutropenia. The increased frequency of infections is due to both decreased number and function of neutrophils.

Question: Dental procedures for which antibiotic of choice for the prophylaxis of endocarditis in adults is (Note: Patient is allergic to penicillin and he is not able to take oral medicine):
A. Clarithromycin 500mg 1 hr. before dental procedures
B. Cephalexin 2g 1 hour before dental procedures
C. Cefadroxil 2g 1 hour before dental procedures
D. Clindamycin 600 mg. 30 min. before dental procedures
Correct Answer: D

Question: A 33-year-old man has never been vaccinated for hepatitis B. Serologic tests reveal negative hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) and positive antibody to surface antigen. Which of the following conditions does this serologic pattern best fit with?
A. previous hepatitis B infection
B. chronic active hepatitis
C. acute hepatitis B infection
D. poor prognosis
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: The antibody can be demonstrated in 80-90% of patients, usually late in convalescence, and indicates relative or absolute immunity. In contrast, HBsAg occurs very early and disappears in < 6 months. Persistence of HBsAg indicates chronic infection. The pattern in this patient is also seen postvaccination, and perhaps as a consequence of remote infection.

Question: The diagnosis of diabetes mellitus is ceain in which of the following situations?
A. Abnormal oral glucose tolerance in a 24-yrs-old woman who has been dieting
B. Successive fasting plasma glucose concentrations of 8, 9, and 8.5 mmol/L in an asymptomatic, otherwise healthy businesswoman
C. A serum glucose level >7.8 mmol/L in a woman in her twenty-fifth week of gestation after a 50-g oral glucose load
D. Persistent asymptomatic glycosuria in a 30-yrs-old woman
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: The occurrence of hyperglycemic ketoacidosis or hyperglycemic hyperosmolar coma is diagnostic of diabetes mellitus. Similarly, persistent fasting hyperglycemia , even if it is asymptomatic, has been recommended by the National Diabetes Data Group as a criterion for the diagnosis of diabetes. However, abnormal glucose tolerance-whether after eating or after a standard "glucose tolerance test" -can be caused by many factors (e.g., anxiety, infection or other illness, lack of exercise, or inadequate diet). Similarly, glycosuria may have renal as well as endocrinologic causes. Therefore, these two conditions cannot be considered diagnostic of diabetes. Gestational diabetes is diagnosed in women between the twenty-fouh and twenty-eighth weeks of gestation, first using a 50-g oral glucose load if the I-h glucose level >7.8 mmol/L (140 mg/dL); a 100-g oral glucose test is performed after an overnight fast. Gestational diabetes is initially treated with dietary measures; if the postprandial glucose level remains elevated, insulin therapy is often staed. About 30% of women with gestational diabetes will eventually develop true diabetes mellitus.

Question: Features of shock
A. Decreased GFR
B. Increased renin
C. Decreased rennin
D. Decreased Coisol
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: In early clinical septic shock, renal function was lower, which was accompanied by renal vasoconstriction, a lower renal oxygen delivery, impaired renal oxygenation, and tubular sodium reabsorption at a high oxygen cost compared with controls decrease or decline in the GFR implies progression of underlying kidney disease or the occurrence of a superimposed insult to the kidneys. This is most commonly due to problems such as dehydration and volume loss. An improvement in the GFR may indicate that the kidneys are recovering some of their function Ref Davidson 23rd edition pg 460

Question: DOC for listeria meningitis:
A. Ampicillin
B. Cefotaxime
C. Cefotriaxone
D. Ciprofloxacin
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. is 'a' i.e., Ampicillin Treatment of listeria infectiono The antibiotic of choice for listeria infection is ampicillin or penicillin G.Antibiotic regimens for listeria infection||||First line regimensPenicillin allergic patientsAlternative drugso Ampicillin or Penicillin is the drug of choiceo Trimethoprim sulphame- thoxazoleo Imipenem and meropenemo Other antibiotic that are less effective# Vancomycin# Erythromycin# Chloramphenicol

Question: A six year old male baby presents to a hospital with recurrent gross hematuria for 2 years. There is no h/o burning micturition or pyuria. Urine routine examination demonstrated no pus cells and urine culture was sterile. Serum C3 levels were normal. What is the most probable diagnosis-
A. Wilm's tumour
B. IgA nephropathy
C. Post-streptococcal glomerulonephritis
D. Urinaiy tract infection
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Wilms tumor is a rare kidney cancer that is highly treatable. Most kids with Wilms tumor survive and go on to live normal, healthy lives. Also known as nephroblastoma, Wilms tumor can affect both kidneys, but usually develops in just one Wilms' Tumor; Nephroblastoma) Wilms tumor is an embryonal cancer of the kidney composed of blastemal, stromal, and epithelial elements. Genetic abnormalities have been implicated in the pathogenesis, but familial inheritance accounts for only 1 to 2% of cases. Diagnosis is by ultrasonography, abdominal CT, or MRI The AMER1 gene is located on the X chromosome (one of the two sex chromosomes), so when Wilms tumor is caused by mutations in this gene, the condition follows an X-linked dominant pattern Ref Harrison20th edition pg 233

Question: Diagnosis of carcinoid tumors is done by:
A. 5HIAA
B. DHEA
C. DHEA
D. Metanephrines
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Answer is A (5HIAA): The diagnosis of typical carcinoid tumors is done by measurement of 5HIAA levels. Diagnosis of Carcinoid Tumors (Harrison) The diagnosis of carcinoid syndrome relies on measurement of urinary or plasma serotonin or its metabolites in the urine. Typical carcinoid syndrome (high level of serotonin) is characterized by high levels of 5HIAA. The measurement of 5HIAA is most frequently used for typical carcinoid syndrome. Most physicians' only use urinary 5HIAA levels / excretion rates however plasma and platelets serotonin levels if available provide additional information. Platelet serotonin levels (5-HT) are more sensitive than urinary 5HIAA levels but are not generally available. Atypical carcinoid syndromes (low levels of serotonin) may have normal or minimally elevated 5HIAA levels. In such patient's urinary levels of other tryptophan metabolites such as 5HTP should be measured. Elevated levels of urinary 5 HTP is suggestive of an atypical carcinoid syndrome.

Question: 65-year-old man presents with anaemia and posterior column dysfunction, the likely cause is -
A. B1-deficit
B. B12-deficit
C. SSPE
D. Multiple selerosis
Correct Answer: B

Question: A patient present with lower gastrointestinal bleed. Sigmoidoscopy shows ulcers inthe sigmoid. Biopsy from this area shows flask-shaped ulcers. Which of the following is the most appropriate treatment -
A. Intravenous ceftriaxone
B. Intravenous metronidazole
C. Intravenous steroids and sulphasalazine
D. Hydrocoisone enemas
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: This may be caused by haemorrhage from the colon, anal canal or small bowel. It is useful to distinguish those patients who present with profuse, acute bleeding from those who present with chronic or subacute bleeding of lesser severity .Severe acute lower gastrointestinal bleeding .This presents with profuse red or maroon diarrhoea and with shock. Diveicular disease is the most common cause and is often due to erosion of an aery within the mouth of a diveiculum. Bleeding almost always stops spontaneously, but if it does not, the diseased segment of colon should be resected after confirmation of the site by angiography or colonoscopy. Angiodysplasia is a disease of the elderly, in which vascular malformations develop in the proximal colon. Bleeding can be acute and profuse; it usually stops spontaneously but commonly recurs. Diagnosis is often difficult. Colonoscopy may reveal characteristic vascular spots and, in the acute phase, visceral angiography can show bleeding into the intestinal lumen and an abnormal large, draining vein. In some patients, diagnosis is achieved only by laparotomy with on-table colonoscopy. The treatment of choice is endoscopic thermal ablation but resection of the affected bowel may be required if bleeding continues. Bowel ischaemia due to occlusion of the inferior mesenteric aery can present with abdominal colic and rectal bleeding. It should be considered in patients (paicularly the elderly) who have evidence of generalised atherosclerosis. The diagnosis is made at colonoscopy. Resection is required only in the presence of peritonitis. Meckel's diveiculum with ectopic gastric epithelium may ulcerate and erode into a major aery. The diagnosis should be considered in children or adolescents who present with profuse or recurrent lower gastrointestinal bleeding. A Meckel's 99mTc-peechnetate scan is sometimes positive but the diagnosis is commonly made only by laparotomy, at which time the diveiculum is excised Primary prevention of variceal bleeding If non-bleeding varices are identified at endoscopy, b-adrenoceptor antagonist (b-blocker) therapy with propranolol (80-160 mg/day) or nadolol (40-240 mg/day) is effective in reducing poal venous pressure. Administration of these drugs at doses that reduce the hea rate by 25% has been shown to be effective in the primary prevention of variceal bleeding. In patients with cirrhosis, treatment with propranolol reduces variceal bleeding by 47% (number needed to treat for benefit (NNTB) 10), death from bleeding by 45% (NNTB 25) and overall moality by 22% (NNTB 16). The efficacy of b-blockers in primary prevention is similar to that of prophylactic banding, which may also be considered, paicularly in patients who are unable to tolerate or adhere to b-blocker therapy. Carvedilol, a non-cardioselective vasodilating b-blocker, is also effective and may be better tolerated at doses of 6.25-12.5 mg/day). For these, dose should be titrated, as tolerated, to achieve a hea rate of 50-55 beats/min, if possible.metrandazole can be given sigmoidal ulcer Ref Davidson edition23rd pg 869

Question: Platelet transfusion is not indicated in -
A. Dilutional Thrombocytopenia
B. Immunogenic Thrombocytopenia
C. Aplastic Anemia
D. DIC
Correct Answer: B

Question: Primary complex in which of the following sites suggest congenital tuberculosis -
A. Lungs
B. Liver
C. Lymph nodes
D. Skin
Correct Answer: B

Question: Hyperchloremic acidosis is seen in-
A. A
B. Diarrhoea
C. DKA
D. Dehydration
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: The combination of hyperkalemia and hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis is often present, even at earlier stages of CKD (stages 1-3).In patients with diabetic nephropathy or in those with predominant tubulointerstitial disease or obstructive uropathy; this is a non-anion-gap metabolic acidosis.

Question: Manifestation of Acute Dissection include all of the following, Except:
A. Pericardial effusion
B. AR
C. MR
D. AMI
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Answer is C (MR) Mitral Regurgitation is not a feature of Aoic dissection Aoic Regurgitation and Pericardial Tamponade may be seen in proximal dissection Hemopericardium and cardiac tamponade may complicate a dissection involving the ascending aoa (type A lesion with retrograde dissection): Acute Aoic Regurgitation (AR) is an impoant and common complication of proximal dissection - Acute Myocardial Ischemia may be associated with Aoic dissection 'Bowel Ischemia, hematuria and myocardial Ischemia have all benn observed with Aoic dissection'

Question: Pancytopenia is most common after:
A. Hepatitis
B. Infective carditis
C. Pyelonephritis
D. Meningitis
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Hepatitis is the most common preceding infection, and post hepatitis marrow failure accounts for about 5% of etiologies in most series. Patients are usually young men who have recovered from a bout of liver inflammation 1 to 2 months earlier; the subsequent pancytopenia is very severe. The hepatitis is seronegative (non-A, non-B, non-C, non-G) and possibly due to a novel, as yet undiscovered, virus. Ref: Harrison's principle of internal medicine 17th edition, chapter 102.

Question: All of the following murmurs may be heard in patients with aoic regurgitation except:
A. High-pitched decrescendo diastolic murmur.
B. Soft, low pitched mid distolic rumbling murmur.
C. Mid-systolic ejection flow murmur
D. Pansystolic murmur
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Answer is D (Pansystolic murmur)

Question: Which of the following is not associated with zinc deficiency: March 2005
A. Delayed wound healing
B. Loss of libido
C. Pigmentation
D. Sexual infantilism
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. C: Pigmentation Acrodermatitis enteropathica is a rare inherited form of zinc deficiency, characterized by periorificial and acral dermatitis, alopecia, and diarrhea. Symptoms of Zinc Deficiency Poor Immune system Weight loss Intercurrent infections Hypogonadism in males Lack of sexual development in females Growth retardation Dwarfism Delayed pubey in adolescents Rough skin Poor appetite Mental lethargy Delayed wound healing Sho stature Diarrhea One easily recognized sign which may be caused by zinc deficiency is white spots, bands, or lines on fingernails (leukonychia). Some women may have multiple parallel white bands or lines on the fingernails marking menstrual cycles when marginal zinc deficiency was present.

Question: Kerley B line are seen at
A. Apex
B. Cardiophrenic angle
C. Lung fissure
D. Pleural surface
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ans. is 'd' i.e., Pleural surface Kerley's line Kerley's line is a linear opacity which, depending on its locaton, extent and orientation, may be be fuher classified as :? Kerley's A lines o These are thin, non-branching lines radiating from hilum. These lines are 2-6 cm in length. These lines are found in the mid and upper zones of the lung fields pleural. These lines are due to the thick interlobar septa. Kerley's B lines (septal lines) These are transverse (Horizontal) lines at the lung base pleural. These are 1-2 cm in length and are perpendicular to pleura. Kerley's B line is due to the thickening of interlobar septa due to edema caused by pulmonary venous hypeension (congestion), as occurs in left ventricular failure or mitral stenosis

Question: Most common drug induced Extra Pyramidal Syndrome includes
A. Dystonia
B. Chorea
C. Tardive dyskinesia
D. Hemiballismus
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: (A) Dystonia # Drug Induced & Tardive Movement Disorders> Movement disorders secondary to pharmacological agents represent a large number of extrapyramidal disorders seen by neurologists and psychiatrists in the outpatient setting.> Involuntary movements, including tremor, chorea, athetosis, dyskinesias, dystonia, myoclonus, tics, ballismus and akathisia, may be symptoms of primary neurologic disease or occur secondary to pharmacotherapy CHARACTERISTICS* TremorRhythmic. Oscillatory movement categorized according to its relationship to activity or posture* ChoreaIrregular, unpredictable brief jerky movements* AthetosisSlow, writhing movements of distal parts of limbs* DyskinesiasRecessive abnormal involuntary movements* DystoniaSlow sustained, posturing or contractions of a muscle or group of muscles* MyoclonusRapid, brief shock like muscle jerks* TicRepetitive, irregular stereotype movements or vocalizations* BallismusWild flinging or throwing movements* AkathisiaSubjective sensation of restlessness often associated with inability to keep still. Easily confused with psychiatric symptoms such as agitation, hyperactivity and anxiety> Central stimulants that act as indirect dopamine agonists such as amphetamine> Levodopa, a precursor of dopamine> Direct dopamine agonists such as bromocriptine> Presynaptic dopamine antagonists (dopamine depleting agents) such as reserpine> Neuroleptics such as haloperidol (Haldol) or chlorpromazine (Thorazine), and other medications such as metoclopramide (Reglan) which antagonize or block central dopamine receptors> By far, the most common cause of drug-induced and tardive syndromes are those that block or antagonize dopamine receptors, usually the neuroleptics.

Question: P wave is absent in-
A. Atrial fibrillation
B. Atrial asystole
C. Ventricular fibrillation
D. Ventricular tachycardia
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Absence of the P wave with a flat baseline may indicate: Fine atrial fibrillation Sinoatrial arrest (with a secondary escape rhythm ) in ventricular fibrilation ,ventriculat tachycardia and atrial asystole,a waves are present Ref Harrison 20th edition pg 1423

Question: A patient presents with unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia and presence of urobilinogen in urine. Which amongst the following is the least likely diagnosis -
A. Hemolytic jaundice
B. Crigler Najjar syndrome
C. Gilbert's syndrome
D. Dubin Johnson syndrome
Correct Answer: D

Question: Abnormal function of epithelial chloride channel protein is the cause of
A. Ehlers Danlos syndrome
B. Marfan syndrome
C. Cystic fibrosis
D. Diabetes insipidus
Correct Answer: C

Question: Alternating RBBB with Left anterior hemiblock is seen in
A. 1' degree hea block
B. Complete hea block
C. Mobitz type II block
D. Bi-fascicular block
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ans. is 'd' i.e., Bi-fascicular block Bifascicular block - combination of RBBB with either left anterior hemiblock or left posterior hemiblock. Tri fascicular block - RBBB plus either LAHB/LPHB+ first degree AV block. Complete hea block destruction of - AV node leading to AV dissociation

Question: All of the following heart sounds occur shortly after S2 except
A. Opening snap
B. Pericardial knock
C. Ejection click
D. Tumor plop
Correct Answer: C

Question: A 25 year male presented with high grade fever, headache, neck stiffness, on examination found to have neck rigidity, kernig's sign positive, csf analysis showed neutrophilic predominance, low glucose and limulus amebocyte lysate assay was positive. Which of the following is the likely pathogen?
A. Staphylococcus aureus
B. Streptococcus pneumonia
C. Neisseria meningitides
D. Listeria monocytogenes
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: The Limulus amebocyte lysate assay is a rapid diagnostic test for the detection of gram-negative endotoxin in CSF and thus for making a diagnosis of gram-negative bacterial meningitis. The test has a specificity of 85-100% and a sensitivity approaching 100%. Thus, a positive Limulus amebocyte lysate assay occurs in viually all patients with gram-negative bacterial meningitis, but false positives may occur. Ref Harrison 20th edition page 1001

Question: Most specific enzyme for mi is:
A. Cpk-MM
B. Cpk-MB
C. Cpk-BB
D. LDH
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans: bRef: Harrison, 16thed, p. 1450

Question: Hyperglycemia is seen in all except?
A. Cirrhosis
B. Myotonic dystrophy
C. Lipodystrophy
D. Sarcoma
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: In cirrhosis, blood sugar is elevated, due to reduced uptake of sugar by liver. In myotonic dystrophy and lipodystrophy, there is tissue insensitivity to insulin leading to hyperglycemia. Sarcoma especially large retroperitoneal sarcomas secrete IGF-2 and lead to hypoglycaemia.

Question: Volume of infarcted area in acute myocardial infarction (AMI) can be detected by -a) ECHOb) ECGc) Levels of CPKMBd) Thallium scan
A. b
B. c
C. ac
D. ad
Correct Answer: D

Question: Which of the following statement is/are true about Obstructive lung disease ?
A. mMRC dyspnea scale ,grade 2 includes shoness of breath when hurrying up inclines
B. Decreased FEV1/FVC ,TLC is increased
C. Normal PEFR and decreased in Lung volume
D. Roflumilast is introduced in management of COPD in Group C
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Acute asthma and Emphysema- TLC | due to air trapping Myasthenia gravis- TLC | RV| Obstructive Restrictive | in airflow | Lung volume - Expiratory -Inspiratory COPD Asthma Bronchiectasis ILD Scoliosis NM causes FEV1-| FVC- Normal or | TLC - Normal or | | PEFR Normal | | |PEFR Management of COPD Group A Low Risk, low symptom Bronchodilator Group B Low Risk, High symptom LABA/LAMA, if failed- LAMA+LABA Group C High Risk, Low symptom LAMA+LABA or LABA+ICS Group D High Risk, High symptom LAMA+LABA+ICS | symptoms persists Phosphodiesterase inhibitor (Roflumilast) or Macrolides mMRC DYSPNOEA SCALE (for COPD patients) Grade Impact 1 Incline (Breathlessness on going upstairs) 2 Slow walk than peers (Breathlessness on walking in straight surface) 3 Stops (Keeps on stops walking in between) 4 Too breathless to go out of his house GOLD (Global Initiative for Obstructive Lung Disease) classification

Question: Not a marker for hyperparathyroidism is :
A. Increase in serum calcium
B. Increase in 24 hour urinary calcium excretion
C. Decrease in serum calcitonin
D. Subperiosteal resorption of phalanges
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Answer is C (Decrease in serum calcitonin) : Serum calcitonin is no marker fir hyperparathyroidism. It antagonizes the actions of parathyroid hormone and may be used as a modality of treatment of hypercalcemia secondary to hyperparathyroidism. Markers of hyperparathyroidism (|ed PTH): 1. Increased serum calcium: Stimulates Vit D which causes increased absorption of Ca-H- from gut Increased calcium reabsorption from tubules Increases osteoblastic activity in bones and mobilizes calcium from bone into serum. 2. Decreased serum phosphorus: - PTH acts on tubules to increase excretion of phosphorus. 3. Increased 24 hr urine calcium: - Despite increased reabsorption of Ca++ in renal tubules urinary calcium is increased owing to increased filtration of calcium in glomerular filtrate. 4. Increased Alkaline phosphatase: -Increased resorption of bone leads to compensatory elevation of osteoblastic activity 5. Radiological changes: Subperiosteal resorption of phalanges is characteristic (hand X Rays are always advised) Bone resorption i.e. osteitis fibrosa et cystica (brown tumours) `Salt pepper' or 'pepper pot skull' appearance - Loss of lamina dura

Question: An adult female patient presents with asthma symptoms for at least 4 days a week and wakes up at night due to breathlessness approximately 2 -3 days in a month. she is classified to be having.
A. Severe persistent Asthma
B. Mild persistent Asthma
C. Intermittent Asthma
D. Moderate persistent Asthma
Correct Answer: B

Question: Patient with persistent diarrhea & hypotension. Diagnosis -
A. VIPoma
B. ACTHoma
C. GRFoma
D. Glucagnoma
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. is 'a' i.e., VIPoma Pancreatic Neuroendocrine TumorsTumourBiologicaly active peptide secretedTumour locationMalignant percentageMain symptoms and signsGastrinoma (non b cell tumour)GastrinDuodenum (70%) Pancreas (25%) other sites (5%)60-90o Pain (79-J 00%)o Diarrhoea (30-73%)o GERD (30-35%)o Peptic ulcerInsulinoma (b cell tumour)InsulinPancreas > 99% (Insulinomas are distributed equally on head body and tail of pancrease)< 10o Symptoms of hypoglycemiao Symptoms releive on administration of glucoseVIPOMA (Verner-Morrison syndrome, pancreatic cholera (WDHA)Vasoactive intestinal peptidePancreas 90%40-70o Watery diarrhoea (90-100%)o Hypokalemia (80-100%)o Hypochlorhydriao Dehydration (83%)GlucagonomaGlucagonPancreas 100% (usually occurs singly in pancreatic tail)50-80%o Dermatitis (migratory necrolytic erythema) 67-90%o Glucose intolerance (40-90%)o Weight loss (66 to 96%)o .Anemia(33-85%)o Diarrhoea (15-29%)o Thromboembolism

