Question: Naglers reaction is shown by
A. Clostridium tetani
B. Clostridium botulinum
C. Clostridium perfringens
D. Clostridium septicum
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Nagler's reaction - when Clostridium perfringens is grown in media containing 6 % agar, 5% Fildes peptic digest of sheep blood and 20% human serum, with antitoxin spread on one half of plate, colonies in the other half without antitoxin will be surrounded by a zone of opacity. No opacity around the colonies on the half of plate with antitoxin, this is due to the specific neutralization of the alpha-toxin. This specific lecithinase effect, known as the Nagler's reaction. Reference: Textbook of Microbiology; Anathanarayan and paniker's; 10th edition; Page no: 263

Question: True regarding lag phase is?
A. Time taken to adpt in the new environment
B. Growth occurs exponentially
C. The plateau in lag phase is due to cell death
D. It is the 2nd phase in bacterial growth curve
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Lag phase: Immediately following the seeding of a culture medium, there is no appreciable number, though there may be an increase in the size of the cells. This initial period is the time required for the adaptation to the new environment, during which the necessary enzymes and metabolic intermediates are built up in adequate quantities for multiplication to proceed. The duration of the lag phase varies with the species, sizes of the inoculation, nature of the culture media and the environmental factors such as temperature REF:Ananthanarayan & Panicker's Textbook of Microbiology 8th edition pg no: 24

Question: Organisms that has not been cultured successfully so far is-
A. Leptospira
B. Treponema pallidum
C. Bordetella
D. Staphylococcus
Correct Answer: B

Question: What is the most probable poal of entry of Aspergillus?
A. Puncture wound
B. Blood
C. Lungs
D. Gastrointestinal tract
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Aspergillus species are widely distributed on decaying plants, producing chains of conidia. Aspergillus species unlike Candida species do not form the pa of normal flora of humans. They are ubiquitous in the environment; hence transmission of infection is mostly exogenous. Aspergillus transmission occurs by inhalation of airborne conidia. Risk Factors for invasive aspergillosis are: Glucocoicoid use (the most impoant risk factor) Profound neutropenia or Neutrophil dysfunction Underlying pneumonia or COPD, tuberculosis or sarcoidosis Antitumor necrosis factor therapy.

Question: Which of the following is very difficult to induce antibody -
A. Polysaccharide
B. Protein
C. Antigen
D. Effector
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: An antigen is any substance that causes an immune system to produce antibodies against it. Antigens are usually peptides, polysaccharides or lipids. In general, molecules other than peptides (saccharides and lipids) qualify as antigens but not as immunogens since they cannot elicit an immune response on their own. Ref: Ananthanarayan & Panikers textbook of microbiology 9th edition pg:88

Question: Which of the following is a newly emerging food poisoning organism
A. Salmonella typhimurium
B. Enterococcus
C. Diphtheria
D. Pseudomonas
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans: a (Salmonella typhimurium) Ref: Ananathanarayan,7th ed, p. 303Of the above given, S. typhimurium causes food poisoningSalmonella gastroenteritisS. typhimurium is the most common cause of food poisoning due to salmonella species.Incubation period--6-24 hrsFood poisoning is never caused by S. typhi. Source of transmission: poultry, meat, milk and milk products.C/F-nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, abdominal cramps, fever.Blood culture is usually negativeNoteS. aureus is the most common cause of food poisoning in the westIP and clinical features of various bacteria causing food poisoiningIncubation period Organism responsible 1- hrs S. aureus-nausea, vomiting, diarrheaB. cereus-nausea, vomiting 8-16 hrs C. perfringes-abdominal cramps, diarrhoea (vomiting rare)B. cereus-abdominal cramps, diarrhoea, vomiting > 16 hrs Vibrio cholera-watery diarrhoeaETEC-watery diarrhoeaEHEC-bloody diarrhoeaSalmonella species-inflammatory diarrhoeaCamphylobacter jej uni-inflammatory diarrhoeaShigella species- dysentryV. parahaemolyticus-dysentry

Question: Foam cells are seen in infection with which virus ?
A. Measles
B. EBV
C. Molluscum contagiosum
D. RSV
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. is 'b' i.e., EBV EBV encephalomyelitis shows :Abnormal white matter with perivascular infiltrates of inflammatory cells and foam cells.Some myelin is replaced by lipid-filled macrophages and hyperplastic astrocytes.

Question: Test for diagnosis of pyogenic meningitis is?
A. Widal
B. CSF PCR
C. CSF examination
D. PET scan
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: ANSWER: (C) CSF examinationREF: Harrison 17th ed chapter 376The diagnosis of bacterial meningitis is made by examination of the CSF. The need to obtain neuroimaging studies (CT or MRI) prior to LP requires clinical judgment.A broad-range PCR can detect small numbers of viable and nonviable organisms in CSF and is expected to be useful for making a diagnosis of bacterial meningitis in patients who have been pretreated with oral or parenteral antibiotics and in whom Gram's stain and CSF culture are negative

Question: A 12-year-old girl presents to the casualty with symptoms of fever, shoness of breath, and cough. A chest X-ray reveals complete consolidation of the lower lobe of the left lung. Cultures of the lower lobe of the left lung would most likely reveal which organism?
A. Streptococcus pneumoniae
B. Staphylococcus aureus
C. Klebsiella pneumoniae
D. Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: The history and findings are consistent with a lobar pneumonia. The most common etiologic agent of lobar pneumonia is Streptococcus pneumoniae. ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS Productive cough, fever, rigors, dyspnea, early pleuritic chest pain Consolidating lobar pneumonia on chest radiograph Lancet-shaped gram-positive diplococci on Gram stain of sputum Ref: Papadakis MA, McPhee SJ, "Pneumonia, Pneumococcal." Quick Medical Diagnosis & Treatment

Question: Botulinum affects all of the following, EXCEPT:
A. Neuromuscular junction
B. Preganglionic junction
C. Post ganglionic nerves
D. CNS
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Diplopia, dysphagia, dysahria, dry mouth, vomiting, thirst, constipation are the clinical features associated with botulinum toxin. Patients experience minimal or no CNS effects and usually there's no significant alteration in their mental status. Ingested, inhaled or formed botulinum toxin travels through the vascular system and affects neuromuscular junction, pre ganglionic junction and post ganglionic nerves. Ref: Textbook of Microbiology, Ananthanarayan and Paniker, 7th Edition, Chapter 28, Page 263 & 264 ; Harrisons Principles of Internal Medicine, 16th Edition, Page 843.

Question: Seal finger and whale finger are associated with -
A. Listeria
B. Erysipelothrix
C. Corynebacterium
D. Treponema
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. is 'b' i.e., Erysipelothrix

Question: The most sensitive method for detecting cervical Chlamydia trachomatis infection is:
A. Direct fluorescent antibody test
B. Enzyme immunoassay
C. Polymerase chain reaction
D. Culture on irradiated McConkey cells
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. is 'c' i.e., Polymerase chain reactionRef: Harrison, 17th/e, p. 1074,19th/e, p. 1165 and Ananthanarayan, 9th/e, p. 415Amplification assays such as ligase chain reaction and polymerase chain reaction are the most sensitive chlamydial diagnostic method.Other methods are:(a) Cell culture: Sensitivity (60-80%).(b) Direct immunofluorescent antibody test: Sensitivity 70-80% and quite specific.(c) ELISA: 60-80%.

Question: A labourer involved with repair-work of sewers was admitted with fever, jaundice and renal failure. The most appropriate test to diagnose the infection in this patient is -
A. Weil Felix test
B. Paul Bunnell test
C. Microscopic agglutination test
D. Microimmunofluorescence test
Correct Answer: C

Question: Fries test is used in the diagnosis of:
A. Gonorrhoea
B. Herpes
C. Chanchroid
D. Granuloma venereum
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Granuloma venereum

Question: Which of the following ultrasound finding has the highest association with aneuploidy?
A. Choroid plexus cyst
B. Nuchal translucency
C. Cystic hygroma
D. Single umbilical aery
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: All the above mentioned are ultrasound findings associated with increased risk of aneuploidy although the highest association is seen with cystic hygroma Nuchal translucency and cystic hygroma are both measured in the first trimesterTrisomy 21 is the most common aneuploidy associated with increased NT and cystic hygroma While monosomy X presents as second-trimester hygroma.

Question: Staphylococcus aureus does not cause which of the following skin infection:
A. Ecthyma gangrenosum
B. Bullous impetigo
C. Botryomycosis
D. Cellulitis
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. is. a. Ecthyma gangrenosum

Question: In pontaic fever, which antigen is seen in urine?
A. Lipopolysaccharide-1
B. Lipopolysaccharide-2
C. Lipopolysaccharide-4
D. Lipopolysaccharide-6
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. is 'a' i.e., Lipopolysaccharide-1 Legionella are classified into serogroup on the basis ofgroup specific lipopolysaccharide (somatic antigen or 'O' antigen). Legionella pneumophila sero-group-1 (LP-1) is the most common infecting organism. Urine test detect LP-1.

Question: Acute hemorrhagic conjunctivitis is caused by ?
A. Enterovirus 70
B. Adenovirus
C. Poliovirus
D. Hepadnavirus
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. is 'a' i.e., Enterovirus 70 Acute hemorrhagic conjunctivitis (AHC) may be caused by adenoviruses, but two enteroviruses, enterovirus 70 and coxsackie A24 variant, are the major causes.

Question: Which of the following iodinated compound is present in a maximum concentration in the thyroid?
A. Monoiodotyrosine (MIT)
B. Diiodotyrosine (DIT)
C. T3
D. Reverse T3
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: THYROID HORMONE SYNTHESIS AND SECRETIONThyroid hormones are synthesized in the colloid, near the apical cell membrane of the follicular cells. Catalyzed by the enzyme thyroidal peroxidase, iodide in the thyroid cell is oxidized to iodine.The iodine enters the colloid and is rapidly bound at the 3 position to tyrosine molecules attached to thyroglobulin, forming monoiodotyrosine (MIT).MIT is next iodinated at the 5 position, forming diiodotyrosine (DIT).Two DIT molecules then condense in an oxidative process ("coupling reaction") to form one thyroxine (T4) molecule.Some T3 is probably formed within the thyroid gland by condensation of MIT with DIT. A small amount of reverse T3 (rT3) is also formed.In the normal thyroid, the average distribution of iodinated compounds is 23% MIT, 33% DIT, 35% T4, 7% T3, and 2% reverse T3.

Question: H. capsulatum, a dimorphic fungus, is found in soil heavily contaminated with bird droppings. Which of the following statements best describes the presence of the organism in tissue biopsies?
A. Yeasts with broad-based bud
B. Single-cell yeasts with pseudohyphae
C. Arthrospores
D. Oval budding yeasts inside macrophages
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Histoplasma capsulatum is a dimorphic fungus that forms two types of spores: tuberculate macroconidia and microconidia. Inhalation of the microconidia transmits infection. Inhaled spores (microconidia) are engulfed by macrophages and develop into yeast forms. Most infections remain asymptomatic; small granulomatous foci heal by calcification. However, pneumonia can occur. The heterophile antibody test is useful for early diagnosis of infectious mononucleosis. The figure below illustrates the oval budding yeasts.

Question: Budding reproduction in tissue is seen in
A. Cryptococcus, candida
B. Candida, rhizopus
C. Rhizopus, mucor
D. Histoplasma, candida
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Cryptococcus is a yeast, candida is a yeast-like fungus. Both are reproduced by budding Histoplasma is a dimorphic fungus Mucor and Rhizopus are produced by asexual means sporangiospores Reference: Textbook of Microbiology; Baveja; 4th edition

Question: Spore forming anaerobic gram positive bacilli ?
A. Bacillus Anthracis
B. Clostridia
C. Corynebacterium
D. Peptostreptococcus
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. is 'b' i.e., Clostridia There are two medically impoant spore forming bacteria. Both of them are 'gram positive' `bacilli' :-Aerobic : BacillusAnaerobic (obligate anaerobes) : Clostridia.

Question: Fish tank granuloma is seen in -
A. Mfortuitum
B. Mkansasi
C. Mmarinum
D. M leprosy
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. is 'c' i.e., M. Marinum o Fish tank granulomaalso called ' swimming pool granuiomaf is caused by M. marinum.Principal types of opportunist mycobacterial disease in man and the usual causative agents.DiseasesUsual causative agentLymphadenopathyM. avium complexM. scrofulaceumSkin lesionPost-trauma abscessSwimming pool granulomaBuruli ulcerM. chelonaeM.fortuitumM. terraeM.marinumM. ulceransPulmonary' diseaseM. avium complexM. kansasiiM.xenopiM.malmoenseDisseminated diseaseAIDS-relatedM, avium complexM.genevenseM.avium complexM. chelonae

Question: TYNDALLISATION is a type of
A. intermittent sterilization
B. pasteurisation
C. boiling
D. autoclaving
Correct Answer: A

Question: Sedimentation coefficient of Ig E is:
A. 7S
B. 8S
C. 11S
D. 20 S
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans : b 8S Ref: Ananthanarayanan 8th editionSvedberg unit - a sedimentation constant of 1 x 1013sec. Sedimentation unit is studied by ultracentrifugation - for diversity of antibody moleculeIgG -7IgA -7IgM -19Ig D -7IgE -8

Question: "Acute Meningoencephalitis" is caused by:
A. E. histolytica
B. Nageleria
C. Giardia
D. E.coli
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Nageleria

Question: The process of destroying all microbes including spores is called :
A. Disinfection
B. Antisepsis
C. Asepsis
D. Sterilization
Correct Answer: D

Question: All are true about streptococcus Except
A. M-protein is responsible for production of mucoid colonies
B. M-protein is responsible for virulence
C. Mucoid colonies are virulent
D. Classified based on their haemolytic propeies.
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Mucoid colonies are due to the production of the capsule of hyaluronic acid not due to M-protein. Growth characteristic of Strep. pyogenes: On blood agar, virulent stains form matt or mucoid colonies while avirulent from glossy colonies. M, T, R are proteins found on the outer pa of the cell wall and forms the basis of Griffith classification. M protein - acts as virulence factor and antibody against it is protective. T and R protein - No relation to virulence Ref : 208

Question: Which bacteria acts by inhibiting protein synthesis?
A. Pseudomonas
B. Staphylococcus
C. Streptococcus
D. Klebsiella
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. is 'a' i.e., Pseudomonas

Question: Osgood Schlatter disease is associated with osteochondritis of
A. Patella
B. Femur medial condyle
C. Tibial tubercle
D. Femur lateral condyle
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Types of Osteochondritis and Nomenclature Traction apophysitis (chronic strain injuries) Tibial Tuberosity Osgood-Schlatter Calcaneum Sever The lower pole of patella Sinding-Larsen&;s

Question: Measles is infective for:
A. One day before and 4 days after rash
B. Four days before and five days after rash
C. Entire incubation period
D. Only during scabs falling
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Measles/English Measles is spread through respiration (contact with fluids from an infected person&;s nose and mouth, either directly or through aerosol transmission), and is highly contagious -- 90% of people without immunity sharing a house with an infected person will catch it. The infection has an average incubation period of 14 days (range 6-19 days) and Period of communicability in measles is approximately 4 days before and 5 days after the appearance of the rash. Measles is an infection of the respiratory system caused by a virus, specifically a paramyxovirus. REF : ananthanarayana 10th ed

Question: Metachromatic granules are stained by?
A. Ponder's stain
B. Negative stain
C. Gram's stain
D. Leishman stain
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. is 'a' i.e., Ponder's stain

Question: Enterobius commonly inhabit the: September 2011
A. Duodenum
B. Jejunum
C. Ileum
D. Caecum
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ans. D: Caecum Adult Enterobius vermicularis worms inhabit the caecum, appendix and adjacent poions of the ascending colon, lying closely applied to the mucosal surface. Pinworm (genus En terobius)/Threadworm/Seatworm, It is a nematode (roundworm) and a common human intestinal parasite, especially in children. It inhabits the caecum, appendix and adjacent poion of the ascending colon, lying closely applied to the mucosal surface It causes enterobiasis, or less precisely as oxyuriasis in reference to the family Oxyuridae. The pinworm appears as a white, small and delicate nematode. The adult female has a sharply pointed posterior end, is 8 to 13 millimeters long, and 0.5 millimeter thick. The adult male is considerably smaller, measuring 2 to 5 millimeters long and 0.2 millimeter thick, and has a curved posterior end. The eggs are translucent and have a surface that adheres to environmental objects. The eggs measure 50 to 60 micrometers by 20 to 30 micrometers, and have a thick shell that is flattened on one side. The small size and colorlessness of the eggs make them invisible to the naked eye, except in barely visible clumps of thousands of eggs. Eggs may contain a developing embryo or a fully developed pinworm larva.Inside the host, the larvae grow to 140-150 micrometers in length Pinworms spread through human-to-human transmission, by ingesting (i.e., swallowing) infectious pinworm eggs and/or by anal sex. The eggs are hardy and can remain ble (i.e., infectious) in a moist environment for up to three weeks.They do not tolerate heat well, but can survive in low temperatures: two-thirds of the eggs are still ble after 18 hours at -8 degrees Celsius (18 degF). After the eggs have been initially deposited near the anus, they are readily transmitted to other surfaces through contamination. The surface of the eggs is sticky when laid, and the eggs are readily transmitted from their initial deposit near the anus to fingernails, hands, night-clothing and bed linen.From here, eggs are fuher transmitted to food, water, furniture, toys, bathroom fixtures and other objects.Household pets often carry the eggs in their fur, while not actually being infected. Dust containing eggs can become airborne and widely dispersed when dislodged from surfaces, for instance when shaking out bed clothes and linen.Consequently the eggs can enter the mouth and nose through inhalation, and be swallowed later. Although pinworms do not strictly multiply inside the body of their human host, some of the pinworm larvae may hatch on the anal mucosa, and migrate up the bowel and back into the gastrointestinal tract of the original host. This process is called retroinfection. Despite the limited, 13 week lifespan of individual pinworms, autoinfection (i.e., infection from the original host to itself), either through the anus-to-mouth route or through retroinfection, causes the pinworms to inhabit the same host indefinitely

Question: EBV causes all EXCEPT:
A. Nasopharyngeal carcinoma
B. Burkitt s lymphoma
C. Verrucous lymphoma
D. Hodgkin's lymphoma
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: ANSWER: (C) Verrucous lymphomaREF: Jawett's 24th edition Section IV. Virology > Chapter 33. Herpesviruses Cancer by EBV:EBV is recognized as a cause of Burkitt's lymphoma, nasopharyngeal carcinoma, Hodgkins disease, and some other lymphomas. Sera from patients with Burkitt's lymphoma or nasopharyngeal carcinoma contain elevated levels of antibody to virus-specific antigens, and the tumor tissues contain EBV DNA and express a limited number of viral genes. EBV-associated B cell lymphomas are a complication for immunodeficient patients

Question: Inhalation of fungal spores can cause primary lung infections. Of the following organisms, which one is most likely to be associated with this mode of transmission?
A. C. immitis
B. S. schenckii
C. C. albicans
D. T. tonsurans
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: C. albicans and Candida tropicalis are opportunistic fungi, and as part of the normal flora are not transmitted by inhalation. C. immitis is a dimorphic fungus and inhalation of the spores transmits the infection. Sprothrix is also a dimorphic fungus but its portal of entry is cutaneous. Trychophyton is a dermatophyte and one of the causes of athlete's foot.

Question: Mad Cow disease (Spongiform disease) occurs due to
A. C J virus
B. Arena Virus
C. Kuru Virus
D. Parvo Virus
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Mad cow disease or bovine spongiform encephalopathy i.e. Caused by “prions”
“PRIONS” are unconventional transmissible agents, proteinaceous in nature.”
Diseases caused by prions are
Kuru
Creutzfeldt Jakob Disease.
Gerstmann Straussler Scheinker Syndrome
Fatal Familial Insomnia.
Scrapie Of Sheep
Transmissible Encephalopathy of Mink.
Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy (Mad Cow Disease)

Question: HIV can -
A. Cross blood brain barrier
B. RNA virus
C. Inhibited by 0.3% H2O2
D. Thermostable
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: it can cross blood brain barrier and cause cns infection REF:ANANTHANARAYANAN TEXT BOOK OF MICROBIOLOGY 9EDITION PGNO.576

Question: Most common organism causing ventilator associated pneumonia -
A. Legionella
B. Pneumococcus
C. Pseudomonas
D. Coagulase negative staphylococcus
Correct Answer: C

Question: Which among the following is FALSE about congenital toxoplasmosis?
A. IgA is better than IgM in detection
B. Diagnosed by detection of IgM in cord blood
C. IgG is diagnostic
D. Not recalled
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Negative IgM with positive IgG indicates past infection. The presence of IgM antibody (which does not cross placenta) in the infant's circulation will diagnose congenital toxoplasmosis. The double sandwich IgA-ELISA is more sensitive than the IgM-ELISA for detecting congenital infection in the fetus and newborn. The methods used to detect IgM are 1)Double sandwich IgM ELISA 2)IgM immunosorbent assay. Ref: Kim K., Kasper L.H. (2012). Chapter 214. Toxoplasma Infections. In D.L. Longo, A.S. Fauci, D.L. Kasper, S.L. Hauser, J.L. Jameson, J. Loscalzo (Eds), Harrison's Principles of Internal Medicine, 18e.

Question: All the following can be used to grow human viruses except?
A. Continuous cell lines
B. Suckling mice
C. Embryonated egg
D. Enriched media
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: The virus needs cellular components for there growth

Question: Confirmatory test for syphilis is-rpt qun
A. FTA-ABS
B. VDRL
C. PCR
D. Culture and sensitivity
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: rpt qun

Question: A 20 years female has hepatosplenomegaly, fever, pallor and generalized lymphadenopathy. Lab test useful for diagnosis is/are -a) ESRb) Electrophoresisc) Parasite detection in aspirated) ELISAe) Routine haemogram
A. acd
B. ace
C. cde
D. ade
Correct Answer: B

Question: Mammalian Mitochondria are involved in all of the following Except
A. Fatty acid synthesis
B. DNA synthesis
C. Fatty acid oxidation (b-oxidation)
D. Protein synthesis
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Protein synthesis is a cytoplasmic process.Fatty acid synthesis stas with the production of Acetyl Co-A within the mitochondria. b-oxidation of fatty acid oxidation also occurs in mitochondria. Mitochondrial DNA synthesis occurs within the mitochondria.

Question: Which of the following is the most common cause of emergency depament visit related to LSD and its related substances?
A. Bad trip
B. Flashbacks
C. Synaesthesia
D. Papillary dilatation
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: The most frequent acute medical emergency associated with LSD use is a panic episode (the "bad trip"), which may persist up to 24 h.A trip is a period of intoxication from a hallucinogenic drug, such as lysergic acid (LSD) or magic mushrooms (psilocybin). It is called a trip because perceptions of the world change so dramatically, it can feel as if a trip to a strange, new land is taken. Unpleasant experience of hallucinogen intoxication is known as a bad trip.Harrison 19e pg: Cocaine and Other Commonly Abused Drugs

Question: The following infection resembles malignancy -
A. Echinococcus granulosus
B. E. multilocularis
C. E.vogeli
D. E. oligarthus
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. is 4b' i.e., E. multilocularis o The chief character of E. multilocularis cyst is its tendency to proliferate, thereby resembling a neoplasm.Hydatid disease of liver is caused byo Echinococcus granulosuso Echinococcus multiloculariso Echinococcus vogeli- Unilocular cystic lesions- Multi locular alveolar hydatid cyst- Polycystic hydatid disease.

Question: Serological testing of patient shows HBsAg, IgM Anti-HBc and HBeAg positive . The patient has-
A. Chronic hepatitis B with low infectivity
B. Acute hepatitis B with high infectivity
C. Chronic hepatitis with high in fectivity
D. Acute on chronic hepatitis
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: HBs Ag is the first marker appear in the blood after infection. Anti HBc is the earliest antibody seen in blood. HBeAg indicates infectivity REF:MICROBIOLOGY ANANTHA NARAYANAN NINTH EDITION PAGE.546&547

Question: A 28 year old labourer, 3 yrs back presented with penile ulcer which was not treated. Later he presented with neurological symptoms for which he got treated. Which is the test to monitor response to treatment?
A. VDRL
B. FTA ABS
C. TPI
D. RPR
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: This is a case of neurosyphilis. A positive nontreponemal CSF serologic test result (CSF VDRL) establishes the diagnosis of neurosyphilis (and an increased cell count in response to the spirochete documents the presence of active disease). In VDRL test, the inactivated serum is mixed with cardiolipin antigen on a special slide & rotated for 4 minutes. Cardiolipin remains as uniform crystals in normal serum but it forms visible clumps on combining with regain antibody. The reaction is read under low power microscope. By testing serial dilutions, the antibody titre can be estimated. The results are repoed as reactive, weak by reactive / not reactive. The VDRL test can be used for testing CSF also, but not plasma. A number of modification of VDRL test have been developed, of which the Rapid Plasma Reagin (RPR) is the most popular. In RPR test. VDRL antigen containing carbon paicles which make the result more clear cut & evident to the naked eye The RPR test is done with unheated serum / plasma but is not suitable for testing CSF. Ref: Ananthanarayanan & Paniker's textbook of microbiology Ed 8 Pg - 375; Klausner J.D., Hook III E.W. (2007). Chapter 20. Neurosyphilis. In J.D. Klausner, E.W. Hook III (Eds), CURRENT Diagnosis & Treatment of Sexually Transmitted Diseases.

Question: All viruses can be cultured in
A. Chemically defined media as that used for bacteria
B. Living systems only
C. Agar culture
D. Non living systems also
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Viruses can be cultivated in living systems only.

Question: R-factor in bacteria is transferred by
A. Transduction
B. Transformation
C. Conjugation
D. Vertical transmission
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Conjugation

Bacterial conjugation is the transfer of genetic material between bacteria through direct cell to cell contact or through a bridge- like the connection between two cells.
Conjugation is a process whereby a donor (male) bacterium makes physical contact with a recipient (female) bacterium.
Donor status is determined by the presence of plasmid.
This plasmid codes for specialized fimbria (sex pilus) and for self-transfer.
Sex pilus (conjugation tube) helps in transfer of genetic material from male bacterium to female bacterium.
The plasmid is known as transfer factor (sex factor or fertility factor).
The plasmid may be R factory which codes for transferrable multiple drug resistance.
The DNA of the plasmid replicates during transfer so that each bacterium receives a copy → Recipient becomes a donor and the donor retains its donor status.

Question: Babesiosis is transmitted by -
A. Tick
B. Mites
C. Flea
D. Mosquito
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. is 'a' i.e., Tick Babesiao Babesiosis is a protozoan disease caused by two species of Babesia : Babesia microti and Babesia divergens.o It is transmitted by loxdid tick.o Babesia infects the RBCs and resides inside the RBCs ( intraerythrocytic). Intraery throcytic infection of Babesiosis is characterised by maltese cross. Maltese cross is a characteristic arrangement of parasites within the erythrocytes - Parasites within erythrocytes are arranged such that pointed ends of four parasites come in contact thereby giving a tetrad configuration resembling a maltese cross. Tetrad forms or 'Maltese cross' appearance is considered pathognomic of Babesiosis.o Clinically Babesiosis presents with chills, fever, mild hepatosplenomegaly, and mild hemolytic anemia,o Treatment includes Atovaquone plus azithromycin or quinine plus clindamycin.o Babesiosis can easily be confused with P. falciparum malaria.Following two features distinguish Babesiosis from malariaPresence of maltese cross in Babesiosis (absent in malaria)Absence of pigment Hemozoin in Babesiosis (present in malaria)Note - Maltese cross is also seen in cryptococcus and aspergillus.

Question: All of the following are true about BCG vaccine except.
A. WHO recommends Danish 1331 strain of M.bovis
B. Given intradermally
C. Normal saline is a diluent
D. Site of injection should be cleaned with spirit
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Site of injection should be cleaned with soap but not with disinfectant or spirit.

Question: The capsule of cryptococcus neoformans in a CSF sample is best seen by -
A. Gram stain
B. India ink preparation
C. Giemsa stain
D. Methenamine-silver stain
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Cryptococcus is the capsulated yeast.
Among the given staining techniques, India ink preparation is the best staining technique used for demonstration of capsule (negative staining) - sensitivity of the technique: 60–75%.

Other capsular staining techniques are:

10% Nigrosin staining
Modified India ink preparation with 2% chromium mercury
Alcian blue staining

Methanamine silver and Periodic acid- Schiff – used for tissue sample.
Sensitivity of various diagnostic tests- Harrison 18/e p1652

Cryptococcal antigen detection in CSF—90%
Blood culture: 10—30% in non-HIV patients and 60% in HIV patients
Sputum culture: 10%
Sputum antigen detection: 30%

Question: Tuberculin test denotes:
A. Previous or present sensitivity to tubercle proteins
B. Patient is resistant to TB
C. Person is susceptible to TB
D. Protective immune status of individual against TB
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. is 'a' i.e., Previous or present sensitivity to tubercle proteins(a) Tuberculin test denotes Type IV (delayed) hypersensitivity to tuberculoprotein 0.1 ml (Purified protein derivative) and used in diagnosis of latent tuberculosis.(b) Positive tuberculin test indicates exposure to Mycobacterium tuberculosis in the form of infection or immunization with or without active disease.

Question: Culture media used for leptospira
A. MYPA agar
B. BYCE agar
C. EMJH Medium
D. Skirrow's medium
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Culture media for leptospira is EMJH media, Korthof's, Stuart's and fletcher's media.

Question: In respiratory and GIT infections, which is the most affected immunoglobulin -
A. IgA
B. IgG
C. IgM
D. IgD
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: IgA Antibody:- IgA is the second most abundant antibody (2nd highest for DHS). It is of two types: Serum IgA: Predominantly in monomeric form. Secretory IgA (SIgA): It is dimeric (valency four); Secretory IgA is responsible for Mucosal /local immunity. IgA also exist in two subclasses/isotypes: IgA1 is mainly found in serum. IgA2 predominates in secretions. IgA (Secretory IgA) is selectively concentrated in secretions and on mucous surfaces forming an antibody paste and is believed to play, an impoant role in local immunity against respiratory and intestinal pathogens. It protects the mucous membranes against microbial pathogens. It serves an impoant effector function at mucous membrane surfaces, which are the main entry sites for most pathogenic organisms.

Question: PK reactio detects -
A. IgG
B. IgA
C. IgE
D. IgM
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: The Prausnitz-Kustner test (PK test, Prausnitz-Kustner reaction) is an immunologic test formerly used by physicians to determine if a patient has an allergic reaction to a specific antigen i.e, IgE Ref: Ananthanarayan & Parkers textbook of microbiology 9th edition pg:98

Question: The intermediate host for T. Saginata is:
A. Man
B. Cow
C. Dog
D. Pig
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Cow

Question: Actinomycetoma is caused by-
A. Actinomyces
B. Nocardias
C. Streptomyces
D. All
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ans. is 'a' i.e., Actinomyces; 'b' i.e., Nocardia; 'c' i.e., Streptomyces

Question: Medium used for antibiotic sensitivity:
A. CLED agar
B. choclolate agar
C. Mueller-Hinton agar
D. Salt milk agar
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Antibiotic sensitivity testing Antibiotic sensitivity testing is carried out to determine appropriate antibiotic to be used for a paicular strain isolated from clinical specimens. Antibiotic testing can be carried out by two broad methods a) Disc diffusion tests b) Dilution tests REF : ananthanarayana 10th ed

Question: A person working in an abattoir presented with pustule on hand which turned into ulcer. Which of the following will best help in diagnosis?
A. Polychrome methylene blue
B. Carbol fuchsin
C. Acid fast stain
D. Calcofluor white
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Cutaneous anthrax generally occurs on exposed surfaces of the arms or hands. A pruritic papule develops 1-7 days after entry of the organisms and rapidly changes into a necrotic ulcer. The lesion is called a malignant pustule. The anthrax bacillus is Gram positive and nonacid fast. The spores do not stain by ordinary methods. When blood films containing anthrax bacilli are stained with polychrome methylene blue for a few seconds and are examined under microscope, an amorphous purplish material is noticed around the bacilli. This represents the capsular material and is characteristic of the anthrax bacillus. This is called "McFadyean's reaction" and is employed for the presumptive diagnosis of anthrax. Ref: Ananthanarayan and Paniker's Textbook of Microbiology By Ananthanarayan And Paniker, 2006, Page 242.

Question: A 3 year old child presents with a history of repeated sinopulmonary infections caused by encapsulated organisms. Which of the following is most likely to be deficient in this case?
A. IgG4
B. IgG3
C. IgG2
D. IgG1
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Deficiency of IgG2 results in recurrent sinopulmonary infections with encapsulated organisms. Deficiency of IgG1 - Bacterial infections (Diptheria, tetanus) Deficiency of IgG3 - Viral infections Deficiency of IgG4 - Parasitic infections IgG is the only maternal immunoglobulin that is normally transpoed across the placenta and provides natural passive immunity to the newborn. Maximum placental transfer - IgG1 Minimum placental transfer - IgG2 Reference: Ananthanarayan and Paniker&;s Textbook of Microbiology Tenth edition

Question: What is the generation time of Mycobacterium leprae?
A. 2-5 days
B. 7-10 days
C. 12-14 days
D. 20-25 days
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Generation time of bacteria refers to the doubling time. Mycobacterium leprae is the slowest growing human bacterial pathogen, it has a doubling time of 14 days. It grows best at 30 degree C, at a temperature lower than body temperature, therefore it grows preferentially in the skin and superficial nerves. Mycobacterium leprae is transmitted by prolonged contact with patients with lepromatous leprosy, who discharge M. leprae in large numbers in nasal secretions and from skin lesions. 2 forms of leprosy are: Tuberculoid and Lepromatous. In tuberculoid type: CMI response to the organism limits its growth, very few acid-fast bacilli are seen, and granulomas containing giant cells form. In lepromatous leprosy: CMI response to organism is poor, the skin and mucous membrane lesions contain large numbers of organisms, foamy histiocytes rather than granulomas are found, and the lepromin skin test result is negative. Ref: Levinson W. (2012). Chapter 21. Mycobacteria. In W. Levinson (Ed), Review of Medical Microbiology & Immunology, 12e.

Question: 27-year-old white man presents to his family doctor complaining of being tired all the time and having a slight fever for the past two weeks. He recently returned from a trip to Las Vegas, where he indulged in some of the infamous nightlife. His physical exam is unremarkable except for a macular rash over his trunk and on the palms of his hands. There are no lesions or ulcers on the penis. What organism is causing this man's illness?
A. Chlamydia trachomatis
B. Neisseria gonorrhea
C. Treponema pallidum
D. Borrelia burgdorferi
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Treponema pallidum Transmitted through unprotected sexual activity with an infected individual. Presents with the symptoms of secondary syphilis, which includes malaise, mild fever, and rash on the palms and trunk. The primary lesion (chancre) may go unnoticed because it is painless and subsides in a few weeks.

Question: A patient of RHD developed infective endocarditis after dental extraction. Most likely organism causing this is -
A. Streptococcus viridans
B. Streptococcus pneumoniae
C. Streptococcus pyogenes
D. Staphylococcus aureus
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Viridans streptococci Commensals in the mouth and upper respiratory tract. Cause transient bacteremia following tooth extraction or other dental procedures; -MC cause of subacute endocarditis: Streptococcus Viridans - MC Streptococcal species in Viridans group causing endocarditis: S. sanguis mc cause of Native valve endocarditis : S. aureus

Question: Most common cause of UTI in a neonate is
A. E.coli
B. S. aureus
C. Enterococcus
D. Anerobes
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Causative agents of UTI:Uncomplicated UTIComplicated UTI*E.coli *Klebsiella*Proteus species*Enterobacter*Staphylococcus saprophyticus*Enterococci *Chlamydia , Neisseria *Ureaplasma, Mycoplasma . Adenovirus *E.coli *Klebsiella*Proteus species*Serratia marcescens*Pseudomonas *Enterococci Staphylococci Ref:Harrison's infectious disease 2nd edition, p296

Question: The following statements are true regarding Chlamydia except:
A. Erthromycin is effective for therapy of Chamydial infections
B. Their cell wall lacks a peptidoglycan layer
C. They can grow in cell free culture media
D. They are obligate intracellular bacteria
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Unique properties of Chlamydia are
Chlamydia is an obligate intracellular parasite. This means they can survive only by establishing residence inside
Animal cells
They need their host's ATP as an energy source for their own cellular activity. They are energy parasites using a
Cell membrane transport system that uses ATP from the host system and gives out ADP.
This obligate intracellular existence makes it impossible to culture these organisms on nonliving artibacterial media.
Due to their small size and failure to grow in cell - free media they were considered to be viruses.
Chlamydiae grows in cultures of a variety of eukaryotic cell lines Me Coy or HeLa cells. It may be necessary to
Treat cells with poly anionic compounds such as DEAD-dextran to reduce the electrostatic barrier to infection.
Antimetabolite such as cycloheximide is added to favour competition for host cell amino acid pools. All types of
Chlamydiae proliferate in embryonated eggs particularly in the yolk sac.
The special features in structure and chemical composition of chlamydiae are
The outer cell wall resembles the cell wall of gram negative bacteria It has a relatively high lipid content
It is rigid but it does not contain typical bacterial peptidoglycan; perhaps it contains a Tetrapeptide linked matrix.
N Acetyl muramic acid also appears to be absent from chlamydiae cell wall
Antibiotic susceptibility of chlamydiae.
Penicillin binding proteins occur in chlamydiae cell wall and chlamydiae cell wall formation is inhibited by penicillins
And other drugs that inhibit transpeptidation of bacterial peptidoglycan. But remember the important point about t/t,
That cell wall inhibitors result in the production of morphologically defective forms but are not effective in clinical
Disease.
• Inhibitors of protein synthesis (tetracyclines, erythromycins) are effective in most clinical infections. Erythromycin
Or tetracyclines are considered the drug of choice for chlamydiae infections.

Question: True about hepatitis C virus are all except -
A. Most common cause of chronic infection
B. Has live attenuated vaccine
C. Spread by blood transfusion
D. Is a flavivirus
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. is 'b1 i.e., Has live attenuated vaccineHEPATITIS C VIRUS (HCV)o The hepatitis 'C' virus has been classified as a new' genus Hepacivirus in the family flaviviridae.o The virus can not be cultured but can be cloned in Escherichia coli.o It is the commonest cause of post transfusion hepatitis and chronic hepatitis.o Incubation period is 50 days (15 - 160 days),o Modes of transmission of HCV are :-Blood transfusion : Most common mode of transmission and HCV is the most common cause of post-transfusion hepatitis.Percutaneous transmission : By needle punctures.Perinatal transmission : Transmission appears to be a function of the degree of maternal viremia which is detected by PCR for HCV RNA.Sexual transmission.o Among hepatitis viruses, HCV has the maximum propensity for chronic hepatitis and chronic carrier state. It can also cause cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma.o The most common indication for liver transplantation currently is cirrhosis due to chronic hepatitis ;C' infection.o HCV usually does not cause acute liver failure (vary rare with HCV)o Extrahepatic manifestation with HCV infection may be essential mixed cryoglobulinemia (more than HBV), porphyria cutanea tarda, pulmonary fibrosis and membrano-proliferative GN.Among the Hepatitis viruses, vaccine is available for HAV and HBV.Live attenuated vaccine is available for HAV only (among hepatitis viruses).

Question: Schistosomiasis is an example of -
A. Meta-zoonoses
B. Cyclo-zoonoses
C. Direct-zoonoses
D. Sporo-zoonoses
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. is 'a' i.e., Meta-zoonoses Zoonoseso Zoonoses are diseases and infections which are naturally transmitted between vertebrate animal and man.o The zoonoses may be classified according to the direction of transmission of disease : -AnthropozoonosesInfection is transmitted to man from lower vertebrate animals.Examples - Rabies, plague, hydatid disease, anthrax, trichinosis,ZoonthroponosesInfection is transmitted from man to lower vertebrate animalsExamples - Human tuberculosis in cattle3. AmphixenosesInfection is maintained in both man and lower vertebrate animals that may be transmitted in either direction.Examples - T. cruzt S. japonicum.Based on the type of life cycle of infecting organism, zoonoses are divided into four categories : -Direct zoonosesTransmitted from an infected vertebrate host to a susceptible vertebrate host by direct contact, by contact with a fomite or by a mechanical vector.The agent itself undergoes little or no propagative changes and no essential developmental change during transmission.Example are - Rabies, Trichinosis, Burcellosis.Cyclo - zoonosesRequire more than one vertebrate host species, but no invertebrate host, in order to complete the developmental cycle of the agent.Example - Taeniasis, echinococcosis (hydatid disease).Meta-zoonosesTransmitted biologically by invertebrate hostIn invertebrate host, the agent multiplies or develop.Examples - Arbovirus infections (e.g., JE, KFD), plague. Schistosomiasis,Sporo - zoonosesThere is non-animal developmental site or reservoir e.g., organic matter (food). Soil and plants.Examples -Larva migrans and some mycoses.

Question: A patient presents with diarrhoea. analysis of stool on wet mount shows mobile protozoa without RBCs and pus cells. The diagnosis is -
A. Balantidium coil
B. Giardiasis
C. Trichomonas hominis
D. Entamoeba histolytica
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. is 'b' i.e., Giardiasis . Mobile protozoa with absence of RBC's and pus cells in stools in a patient with diarrhoea suggests giardiasis. . In balantidum cob and entomoeba histolytica infections, pus cells and RBC's will be present in stools. Trichomonas hominis is considered as non-pathogenic

Question: Loeffler's medium is-
A. Indicator medium
B. Selective medium
C. Enrichment medium
D. Enriched medium
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Enriched media The media containing ingredients which enhance their growth-promoting qualities E.g. Blood agar, Chocolate agar and Loeffler medium. The usual media employed for cultivation of the diphtheria bacillus are Loeffler's serum slope and tellurite blood agar. Diphtheria bacilli grow on Loeffler's serum slope very rapidly and colonies can be seen in 6-8 hours, long before the other bacteria grow. Best Selective media for Corynebaterium is Potassium tellurite agar.

Question: Typhoid carriers are detected by following except ?
A. Isolation of bacteria from urine
B. Isolation of bacteria from bile
C. Vi antigen
D. Widal test
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ans. is 'd' i.e., Widal test

Question: Which is the only living pa of Hydatid cyst?
A. Adventitia
B. Germinal epithelium
C. Laminated membrane
D. Parenchyma of the organ
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Hydatid cyst is caused by Echinococcus granulosus. It has a thick opaque white outer cuticle / laminated layer and an inner thin germinal layer containing nucleated cells. The germinal layer is the site of asexual reproduction. It also secretes the hydatid fluid which fills the cavity. The fluid is clear, colourless / pale yellow with a pH of 6.7 containing salts and protein. It is a good antigen which sensitises the host. The fluid was used as the antigen for Casoni's intradermal test and other diagnostic serological tests. From the germinal layer, small knob like excrescences / gemmules protrude into the lumen of the cyst. These enlarge and become vacuolated and filled with fluid. These are called brood capsules. They are initially attached to the germinal layer by a stalk, but later escapes free into the fluid filled cyst cavity. From the inner wall of brood capsule, protoscolices develop, which represent head of adult worm, complete with invaginated scolex, bearing suckers and hooklets. Each of these are potential tapeworm. Many of the scolices float free in the cyst fluid. These with free brood capsules are called hydatid sand. Ref: Paniker's Textbook of parasitology, 6th Ed page 151.

Question: Which is false regarding Gram positive cocci ?
A. Staph. saprophyticus causes UTI in females
B. Micrococci are oxidase positive
C. Most enterococci are sensitive to penicillin
D. Pneumococci are capsulated
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Unlike streptococci enterococci are not reliably killed by penicillin or ampicillin alone at concentration acheived clinically in the blood or tissues.

Antimicrobial susceptibility testing should be performed routinely on enterococcal isolates.

Other options
Option ‘a’ • Staph. saprophyiticus specially causes UTI in sexually active young women.
Option ‘b’ • Micrococci are catalase and oxidase positive Gr (+ve) cocci. They are strict aerobes and are non pathogenic.

Micrococci are differentiated from Staphylococci by Hugh and deifson oxidation fermentation test in which micrococci shows oxidative pattern while staphylococci show fermentive pattern.

Question: Malaria causing nephrotic syndrome -
A. P. vivax
B. P. Falciparum
C. P. malariae
D. P. Ovale
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: It would appear that quaan malaria causes an immune complex nephritis in some individuals that, once established, is sustained by mechanisms not yet fully explained but which may involve an autoimmune process. Evidence to suppo an immunologic pathogenesis of the renal lesions is provided by the presence of immunoglobulin, complement (C3) and quaan malarial antigen in biopsy specimens studied by immunofluorescence microscopy

Question: Intermediate host for hydatid disease:
A. Man
B. Dog
C. Cat
D. Foxes
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Man

Question: Which of the following does cause epidemic kerato conjuctivitis -
A. Adenovirus
B. Enterovirus
C. Coxsakie virus
D. Herpes virus
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: adeno virus cause epidemic keratoconjuctivitis REF:<\p> MICROBIOLOGY ANANTHA NARAYANAN NINTH EDITION PAGE.482

Question: Pneumocystic carnii infects:
A. Human
B. Monkey
C. Rat
D. Cats
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. c. Rat

Question: All are associated with EBV except -
A. Infectious mononucleosis
B. Nasopharyngeal carcinoma
C. Oral hairy leukoplakia
D. Epidermodysplasi
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: EBV causes nadopharyngeal carcinoma,oral hairy luekoplakia&infectious mononucleosis REF:MICROBIOLOGY ANANTHA NARAYANAN NINTH EDITION PAGE.475

Question: All cause viral hepatitis except -
A. Measles
B. EBV
C. Rhinovirus
D. Reovirus
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. is 'c' i.e., Rhinovirus Impoant viruses causing hepatitis:? 1) Hepatotropic viruses : HAV, HBV, HCV, HD V, HEV. 2) Herpes viruses : CMV, EBV, HSV-1, VZV. 3) Flaviviruses : Yellow fever, dengue fever. 4) Filoviruses : Marburg virus, Ebola virus. 5) Occasinal causes Measles virus, adenovirus, Echoviruses, Coxsackieviruses, influenza virus, parvoviruses, reoviruses, mumps virus.

Question: Which among the following occupation is a risk factor for this presenting illness?
A. A lifeguard in swimming pool
B. A poultry worker
C. Farmer
D. A kennel worker
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. (a) A lifeguard in swimming poolCutaneous larva migrans (CLM) is a clinical syndrome consisting of an erythematous migrating linear or serpiginous cutaneous track;It is also called as creeping eruptionsIndividuals at greatest risk include travelers, children, swimmers in lakes, and laborers whose activities bring their skin in contact with contaminated soilLarva migrans:* It is caused by nematodes that usually cause infection to animals* When they accidentally enters humans - it cannot complete the cycle and hence gets arrested in the body causing larva migrans* It is of two types:# Cutaneous larva migrans# Visceral larva migransComparison between Cutaneous and visceral larva migransCutaneous larva migransVisceral larva migrans* Ancylostoma braziliense (M/c)* Toxocara can is* Ancylostoma caninum (second M/c)* Toxocara cati* Necator americanus* Gnathostoma* Ancylostoma duodenale* Anisakis* Gnathostoma spinigerum * Strongloides * Loa loa * Fasciola * Paragonimus * The question is quite a tricky one. A lifeguard in swimming pool has risk comparatively, as poultry has no link with these organisms. Most of the organisms are dog and canines sources.

Question: Vaccination causing intussusception is
A. Rotavirus
B. Parvovirus
C. Poliovirus
D. BCG
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Rotavirus vaccination - there is a potentially high risk of intussusception with the first dose when this vaccine is given to infants aged more than 12weeks. Ref: Park&;s textbook of preventive and social medicine; 23rd edition.

Question: Most common post splenectomy infection is:
A. Pneumococcus
B. Meningococcus
C. Staphy lococcus
D. Corynebacterium
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Pneumococcus

Question: Vesicular lesions, indistinguishable from primary infection, which arise in other pas of the body of an allergic individual infected with Trichophyton are referred to as
A. Dermatiphytids
B. Trichophytins
C. Eschars
D. Carbuncles
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Dermatiphytids - Hypersensitivity to dermatophyte antigen may occur which leads to appearence of secondary eruption in sensitized patients because of circulation of allergic products. These lesions are indistinguishable , but these lesions are distinct from the primary ringworm lesion as they occur distal to primary site and fungal culture often turns negative.

Question: A 35 years old man presented with dry cough and rusty coloured sputum; He has history of eating in chinese restraunt very often with consumption of crabs often; What is the probable causative agent in this condition?
A. Diphyllobothrium latum
B. Pneumocystis jirovecii
C. Paragonimus westermani
D. Strongyloides stercoralis
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: from above mentioned clinical scenerion Paragonimus westermani (lung fluke) is moste likely to be causitive organism:- Paragonimus westermani first intermediate host- snail 2nd intermediate host - crab in crab metacercarie larva which is cyst like stage is seen. It causes Red Brown sputum or endemic hemoptysis.

Question: Mad Cow Disease has been highly publicized in Great Britain. This disease, which is similar to scrapie, is caused by
A. A prion
B. A virus
C. Rickettsiae
D. An autoimmune reaction
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Mad Cow Disease is related to both scrapie in sheep and bovine spongiform encephalopathy virus. The fear in Great Britain is the potential for acquiring Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, which is a slowly progressive neurodegenerative disease. Theoretically, such acquisition could be through ingestion of beef from infected cows. A prion consists of protein material without nucleic acid. While related to a virus, a prion is a proteinaceous infectious particle that replicates within cells.

Question: The RPR test uses VDRL antigen containing fine
A. Carbon paicles
B. Iodine paicles
C. Silver ions
D. Sodium ions
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: The rapid plasma reagin (RPR) test is a macroscopic, nontreponemal flocculation card test used to screen for syphilis. RPR antigen is prepared from a modified VDR antigen suspension containing choline chloride to eliminate the need to heat inactivate serum, ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) to enhance the stability of the suspension, and finely divided charcoal paicles as a visualizing agent. Ref: Ananthanarayana textbook of Microbiology 9th edition Pgno : 374

Question: Human metapneumovirus is structurally similar to:
A. Influenza virus
B. Respiratory syncytial virus
C. Measles virus
D. Rubella virus
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. b. Respiratory syncytial virus

Question: Which is the principal virulence factor in Clostridium tetani
A. Tetanolysin
B. Tetanospasmin
C. Tetanotactin
D. Immobility factor
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: C.tetani produces two distinct toxins- a hemolysin(tetanolysin), and neurotoxin(tetanospasmin). Tetanospasmin: This is the toxin responsible for tetanus. This toxin acts pre-synaptically. The abolition of spinal inhibition causes an uncontrolled spread of impulses initiated anywhere in the central nervous system. This results in muscle rigidity and spasms. Tetanolysin: it is not relevant in the pathogenesis of tetanus. Ref: Textbook of microbiology; Ananthanarayan and paniker's; 10th Edition; Pg: 265

Question: The type of receptors present on T cells is-
A. IgG
B. IgD
C. CD4
D. Prostaglandins
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: T cell receptor for antigen: The TCR is the recognition molecule for T cells. The TCR is a transmembrane heterodimeric protein containing two disulfide-linked chains. It is composed of two different classes of TCR called: alpha-beta (a and b) and gamma-delta (g and d). The majority of the T cells contain the ab TCR phenotype. However, a smaller percentage of T cells express the g d TCR. The ab T cells are subdivided by their surface markers: CD4 or CD8. They recognize peptide antigens presented by MHC molecules on the surfaces of APC's (antigen-presenting cells) The g d T cells are primarily located in the epithelial linings of the reproductive and GI tracts.(aiims nov. 2020). Theyrecognize different type of antigenswithout the requirement of MHC Prostglandins( eicosanoids) are the lipid compounds acting as mediators of pain and inflamation .they have diverse action such as bronchodilation ,vasodilataion etc.. IgG AND IgD are immunoglobolins involved in defence mechanism

Question: Epidemic hemorrhagic conjunctivitis is caused by -
A. HSV
B. HZV
C. HIV
D. Picorna virus
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Epidemic hemorrhagic conjunctivitis is caused by Coxsackie Virus A24 or Enterovirus 70 (members of the Family Picornaviridae). HSV (Herpes Simplex Virus)- causes oral herpes and genital herpes. HZV (Herpes Zoster Virus) -causes Shingles. HIV -cause AIDS.

Question: Maximum urease +ve is produced by -
A. H. pylori
B. P. mirabilis
C. K. rhinomatis
D. Ureaplasma
Correct Answer: A

Question: Incubation period of gonorrhoea is -
A. Less than 24 hrs
B. 1 to 2 days
C. 2 to 15 days
D. 12 to 25 days
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. is 'c' i.e., 2 to 15 days Incubation period of gonorrhea is 2 - 8 days.

Question: Botulism is a disease of ?
A. Neural transmission caused by the toxin of the bacterium clostridium botulinum
B. Muscular transmission caused by the toxin of the bacterium clostridium botulinum
C. Neuromuscular transmission caused by the toxin of the bacterium clostridium botulinum
D. Non neuromuscular transmission caused by the toxin of the bacterium clostridium botulinum
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. is 'c' i.e., Neuromuscular transmission caused by the toxin of the bacterium clostridium botulinum Botulinum Toxin Cl. botulinum produces a powerful exotoxin that is responsible for its pathogenicity. The toxin differs from other exotoxins in that it is not released during the life of organism. It is produced intracellularly and appears in the medium only on the death and autolysis of the cell. It is the most toxic substance known. Toxin is heat labile, but spores are highly heat resistant. It acts by blocking the release of acetylcholine at synapses and neuromuscular junction. It acts presynaptically. Toxin of all types (A, B, C, D, E, F, G) are neurotoxin except C2 which is a cytotoxin (enterotoxin).

Question: Tick born relapsing fever is/are caused by -
A. Borrelia recurrentis
B. Borrelia duttonii
C. Borrlia burgdorferi
D. All
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. is 'b' i.e., Borrelia duttonii

Question: Q fever is caused by -
A. Pseudomonas
B. Francisella
C. Coxiella burnetii
D. Rickettsia typhi
Correct Answer: C

Question: One of the following is an agglutination test in the diagnosis of typhoid:
A. Wide test
B. Eleks test
C. Mantoux test
D. Wasserman test
Correct Answer: A

Question: False about Immunoglobulins is
A. Y shaped heterodimer composed of four polypeptide chains
B. All four H and L chains are bound to each by disulfide bonds
C. Antibody contains two types of light chain and one type of heavy chain
D. There are 5 classes of H chains and two classes of light chains
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Any antibody contains one type of light chain and one type of heavy chain.

Question: Loeffler&;s syndrome occurs in all except
A. Toxocara
B. Stongyloides
C. Ascaris
D. Giardia
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: *Giardia lamblia -intestinal flagellate,causing intestinal infection. *Loeffler syndrome- inflammatory and hypersensitivity reaction in the lungs lead to cough ,fever, dyspnoea and eosinophilia *toxocara causes visceral larva migrans . ref:Baveja textbook of parasitology 3rd edition.

Question: Blood spill disinfection by:
A. Isopropyl alcohol
B. Hypochlorite
C. Formalin
D. Glutaraldehyde
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: ANS. B# Spaulding's classification for sterilization1. Critical, e.g. heart lung machine, scalpel (contact with blood)2. Semicritical, e.g. endoscopes3. Noncritical, e.g. stethoscope, BP cuff, plasters.Method of sterilization1. Critical: Autoclave/ethylene oxide2. Semicritical: 2% glutaraldehyde for 20 minutes3. For plastic tubes: Gamma rays

Question: Acid fast organisms are -
A. Spores
B. Nocardia
C. Legionella
D. Rodococcus
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Spores may be seen in unstained preparations as Refractile bodies. The forespore stains intensely but once the spores envelope is laid down the spores does not stain readly. Spores appear as unstained areas in Gram-stained preparations but being more acid fast than the vegetative cells they can be stained by a modification of the Diehl -Nelson technique. Ref: Ananthanarayan & paniker's Textbook of Microbiology 9th edition pg no 21

