Question: Following endaerectomy on the right common carotid, a patient is found to be blind in the right eye. It is appears that a small thrombus embolized during surgery and lodged in the aery supplying the optic nerve. Which aery would be blocked?
A. Central aery of the retina
B. Infraorbital aery
C. Lacrimal aery
D. Nasociliary aretry
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: The central aery of the retina is a branch of the ophthalmic aery. It is the sole blood supply to the retina; it has no significant collateral circulation and blockage of this vessel leads to blindness. The branches of this aery are what you view during a fundoscopic exam. Note: The infraorbital aery is a branch of the maxillary aery. It comes through the infraorbital foramen, inferior to the eye. It supplies the maxillary sinus, the maxillary incisors, canine and premolar teeth, and the skin of the cheek below the orbit. The supraorbital aery is another branch of the maxillary aery. It comes through the supraorbital foramen and supplies blood to the muscles, skin and fascia of the forehead. The lacrimal aery is a branch of the ophthalmic aery that supplies the lacrimal gland. The nasociliary aery doesn't exist, but there is a nasociliary nerve that travels with the ophthalmic aery. Ref: Moon D.A., Foreman K.B., Albeine K.H. (2011). Chapter 18. Orbit. In D.A. Moon, K.B. Foreman, K.H. Albeine (Eds), The Big Picture: Gross Anatomy.

Question: Following are the causes of sudden loss of vision except ?
A. Angle closure glaucoma
B. Endophthalmitis
C. Central serous retinopathy
D. Corneal ulceration
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ans. is 'd' i.e., Corneal ulceration

Question: Regarding Sjogren's syndrome, all are true except: September 2010
A. Keratoconjuctivitis sicca
B. Rheumatoid ahritis
C. Epiphora
D. Autoimmune in nature
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. C: Epiphora SjOgren's syndrome (also known as "Mikulicz disease" and "Sicca syndrome", is a systemic autoimmune disease in which immune cells attack and destroy the exocrine glands that produce tears and saliva SjOgren's syndrome can exist as a disorder in its own right (Primary Sjogren's syndrome) or it may develop years after the onset of an associated rheumatic disorder such as rheumatoid ahritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, scleroderma, primary biliary cirrhosis etc. (Secondary SjOgren's syndrome)

Question: Hypersecretory glaucoma is seen in –
A. Epidemic dropsy
B. Marfan's syndrome
C. Hypertension
D. Diabetes
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: "In epidemic dropsy, glaucoma is wide angle glaucoma, with normal chamber and angle. Outflow is within normal limits. The queous shows raised level of histamin, prostaglandin and protein suggesting that glaucoma is hypersecretory". _ Mukherjee

Question: Which of the following is true statement regarding human eye
A. Cornea cut off wavelength upto 400 nm
B. Normal eye medium will permit wavelength of 400- 700 nm
C. Even after cataract surgery UV rays are not penetrated
D. Lens will not reflect light
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. b (normal rye medium will permit wavelength of 400- 700 ntn) Ref: yanoff 3rd ed p 383, internet sitesCornea and lens act as special filters absorbing the more energetic wavelength of the electromagnetic spectrum that can damage the retina. Cornea absorbs wavelength below 295nm where as lens absorbs strongly in the long U V B (300 - 315) and most of the UV A (315 - 400) wave-lengths. Eye light transmittance is relatively high in the 400nm-700nm range.

Question: Grave's ophthalmopathy mostly presents as September 2010
A. Proptosis
B. Ptosis
C. Reduced intraocular tension
D. Increased power of convergence
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. A: Proptosis Graves' ophthalmopathy (also known as thyroid eye disease (TED), dysthyroid/thyroid-associated orbitopathy (TAO), Graves' orbitopathy) is an autoimmune inflammatory disorder affecting the orbit around the eye, characterized by upper eyelid retraction, swelling (edema), redness (erythema), conjunctivitis, reduce dpower convergence and bulging eyes (proptosis).

Question: Which test helps to differentiate between concomitant squint and paralytic squint
A. Cover - uncover test
B. Alternate covertest
C. Direct cover test
D. None of the above
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: This procedure causes breakdown of binocular fusion mechanism thus helpful to differentiate.

Question: A patient on amiodarone is diagnosed to have cornea verticillata. What should be management –
A. Stop the drug
B. Penetrating keratoplasty
C. Lamellar keratoplasty
D. Observation
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Cornea Verticillata

This is a whorl-like opacity in the corneal epithelium seen in patients on long-term treatment with medication such as amiodarone, chloroquine, phenothiazines and indomethacin.
It is also seen in patients with Fabry disease and its carrier state. The condition is generally asymptomatic, harmless and reversible on stopping the drug.
The whorl-like pattern shows the direction of migration of corneal epithelial cells. Occasionally the condition had been known to cause glare and surface discomfort which response to topical lubricants.

Question: "Candle-wax spots" in the retina are present in
A. Sarcoidosis
B. Toxoplasmosis
C. Syphilis
D. Tuberculosis
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: (A) Sarcoidosis # OCULAR MANIFESTATIONS OF SARCOIDOSIS:> Anterior segment: Conjunctival involvement has been reported in patients with ocular sarcoidosis.> Sarcoidosis granulomas are solitary, yellow "millet-seed" nodules.> Anterior uveitis occurs in 22%- 70% of patients with ocular sarcoidosis, and is usually granulomatous & chronic.> Iris nodules have been reported in up to 12.5% of patients with sarcoidosis associated uveitis.> Exacerbations of granulomatous uveitis are often associated with an appearance of fresh iris or fundus nodules.> Posterior synechiae, cataract and glaucoma are common complications.> Corneal band keratopathy develops in a few patients and is usually associated with hypercalcemia.> Posterior segment: The most common manifestations at the posterior segment are vitritis, intermediate uveitis, panuveitis, posterior uveitis, retinal vasculitis & optic nerve involvement. Other manifestations include choroidal nodules & exudative retinal detachment.> Overall, patients with chronic posterior uveitis and panuveitis have significantly more complications than do patients with anterior uveitis.> "Candle wax drippings" and "punched-out" lesions can be seen in patients with uveitis secondary to sarcoidosis.

Question: Lens develops from?
A. Endoderm
B. Mesoderm
C. Surface ectoderm
D. Neuroectoderm
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. c (Surface ectoderm). (Ref. Human Embryology by IB Singh, 6th/352)LENS# LENS develops from surface ectoderm.# Compared to the cornea, it has a much lower converging power of 17 diopters because of the relatively similar refractive indices of aqueous humor, lens, and vitreous body (cornea 42 D).# However, the lens is the only part of the refractive apparatus that is adjustable.# Adjustment to near vision (accommodation) therefore involves only the lens.# In addition, the lens functions as a UV filter for wavelengths between 300 and 400 nm and thus has a protective function for the macula.# Notching of the lens = "pseudocoloboma".# Wilson's disease can induce a yellow-green lens discoloration (chalcosis/ sunflower cataract).# Granular gold deposits located under the lens (chrysiasis lends) can occasionally occur after prolonged treatment with gold preparations (e. g. in primary chronic polyarthritis ).# Other medications, e.g., amiodarone or chlorpromazine, are sometimes deposited in the lens.# In patients with cataract, glittering cholesterol crystals are not infrequently found in the lens (so-called Christmas tree/ decoration cataract).

Question: All are causes of white-dot syndrome except:
A. Fuch's heterochromic uveitis
B. VKH syndrome
C. HIV retinopathy
D. Sympathetic ophthalmitis
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ans. Sympathetic ophthalmitis

Question: Child with mild squint. Intrauterine, bih history, developmental history till date all normal. Corneal reflex normal. All other eye parameters normal except exaggerated epicanthal fold. Diagnosis ?
A. Pseudostrabismus
B. Accomodative squint
C. Exophoria
D. Esophoria
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. is 'a' i.e., Pseudostrabismus Epicantnic fold causes Pseudoesotropia (Pseudostrabismus).

Question: Most serious complication seen in other eye after traumatic injury to one eye: March 2005, September 2008
A. Subconjunctival hemorrhage
B. Corneal edema
C. Sympathetic ophthalmia
D. Sudden loss of vision
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. C: Sympathetic ophthalmia Sympathetic ophthalmia (SO) is a condition in which serious inflammation attacks the sound eye after injury (including intraocular surgeries) to the other. It is the most dreaded complication of unilateral severe eye injury, as it can leave the patient completely blind. Symptoms may develop from days to several years after a penetrating eye injury. Sympathetic ophthalmia is thought to be an autoimmune inflammatory response toward ocular antigens, specifically a delayed hypersensitivity to melanin-containing structures from the outer segments of the photoreceptor layer of the retina. It is thought that Louis Braille, who injured his left eye as a child, lost vision in his right eye due to SO Floating spots and loss of accommodation are among the earliest symptoms. The disease may progress to severe iridocyclitis with pain and photophobia. Commonly the eye remains relatively painless while the inflammatory disease spreads through the uvea. The retina, however, usually remains uninvolved. Papilledema, secondary glaucoma, vitiligo and poliosis of the eyelashes may accompany SO. Diagnosis is clinical, seeking a history of eye injury. An impoant differential diagnosis is Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada syndrome (VKH), which is thought to have the same pathogenesis, without a history of surgery or penetrating eye injury. Definitive prevention of SO requires prompt (within the first 7 to 10 days following injury) enucleation of the injured eye. Evisceration--the removal of the contents of the globe while leaving the sclera and extraocular muscles intact--is easier to perform, offers long-term orbital stability, and is more aesthetically pleasing. But evisceration may lead to a higher incidence of SO compared to enucleation. Immunosuppressive therapy is the mainstay of treatment for SO. When initiated promptly following injury, it is effective in controlling the inflammation and improving the prognosis.

Question: Which among the following is the BEST irrigating fluid during ECCE?
A. Ringer lactate
B. Normal saline
C. Balanced salt solution
D. Balanced salt solution + glutathione
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: BSS plus a balanced salt solution enhanced with bicarbonate, dextrose and glutathione. It is specially used for surgeries requiring prolonged irrigation such as phacoemulsification, pars plana vitrectomy and automated extracapsular cataract extraction. Balanced sterile solution is a sterile physiologically balanced irrigating fluid. It is the most frequently used solution during ophthalmic surgery to keep the cornea from drying out. BSS plus solution causes less corneal edema and endothelial cell damage following vitrectomy. The glutathione protects against depletion of endothelial ATP levels and maintains the integrity of the cell membrane by counteracting endogenous and exogenous oxidative agents. Ref: Surgical Technology for the Surgical Technologist: A Positive Care Approach By Association of Surgical Technologists page 223. Ocular Toxicity of Intraoperatively Used Drugs and Solutions By Rudolph Marie Matheus Antonius Nuijts page 16. Clinical Ophthalmology: Contemporary Perspectives, 9/e By Gupta page 43.

Question: Inclusion body conjunctivitis true is all except:
A. Self limiting
B. Present only in infants
C. Occurs while passage from bih canal
D. Caused by chlamydia
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. Present only in infants

Question: Yoke muscle pair is
A. Rt LR and Rt MR
B. Rt so and Lt Io
C. Rt LR and Lt MR
D. All the above
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Right lateral rectus and left medial rectus.
Yolk muscles are pair of muscles one from eye which contracts simultaneously during version movement.

Question: All are clinical features of chalcosis except
A. Kayser - Fleischer ring
B. Sun - flower cataract
C. Deposition of golden plaques at the posterior pole
D. Dalen- fuch's nodules.
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Dalen - fuch's nodules are formed due to proliferation of the pigment epithelium ----- sympathetic ophthalmitis.

Question: A tumor has the following characteristic retrobulbar location within the muscle cone, well defined capsule, presents with slowly progressive proptosis, easily resectable, occurs most commonly in the 2nd to 4th decade. Most likely diagnosis is -
A. Capillary hemangioma
B. Cavernous hemangioma
C. Lymhangioma
D. Hemangiopericytome
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ref: Clinical ophthalmology 5th/e p.670 *Cavernous hemangioma is the most common benign, intraconal tumor in adults. *Hemangiopericytoma is also retrobulbar intraconal lesion found in adults but is a rare tumor. Moreover owing to its tendency to invade the adjacent tissues, its margins are less distinct than cavernous hemangioma. *Rest 2 options i.e. Dermoid and Capillary hemangioma are primarily extraconal lesions.

Question: Cause of exudative retinal detachment are:
A. Scleritis
B. Toxaemia of pregnancy
C. Central serous retinopathy
D. All
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ans. All

Question: Incomplete closure of palpebral apeure is called: March 2004
A. Lagophthalmos
B. Chalazion
C. Entropion
D. Ectropion
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. A i.e. Lagophthalmos

Question: Most common method of anterior capsulotomy in phacoemulsification
A. Can-opener capsulotomy
B. Intercapsular capsulotomy
C. Capsulorhexis
D. Envelop capsulotomy
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Answer- C. CapsulorhexisThe most commonly used technique for anterior capsulotomy during phacoemulsification is continuous curvilinear capsulorhexis (CCC).

Question: Most common cranial nerve involved in ophthalmoplegic migraine is:
A. II nerve
B. III nerve
C. V nerve
D. VI nerve
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. III nerve

Question: All of the following are true for retinopathy of prematurity except:
A. Occurs in premature infants due to late crying
B. Due to hypoxia there occurs neovascularization followed by fibroproliferation
C. End result is bilateral blindness
D. Blindness can be prevented by early diagnosis and ablation of vascular premature retina with cryotherapy or photocoagulation
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. Occurs in premature infants due to late crying

Question: Type of cataract in chalcosis is
A. Sunflower cataract
B. Blue dot Cataract
C. Snowflake cataract
D. Polychromatic lustre
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Answer- A. Sunflower cataract

Question: Refsum's syndrome is associated with ?
A. Retinitis pigmentosa
B. Xerophthalmia
C. Chalcosis
D. Diabetes retinopathy
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. is 'a' i.e., Retinitis pigmentosa Associations of retinitis pigmentosa Ocular associations : These include myopia, primary open angle glaucoma, microphthalmos, conical cornea and posterior subcapsular cataract. Systemic associations : These are in the form of following syndromes :- i) Laurence-Moon-Biedl syndrome : It is characterised by retinitis pigmentosa, obesity, hypogenitalism, polydactyly and mental deficiency. ii) Cockayne's syndrome : It comprises retinitis pigmentosa, progressive infantile deafness, dwarfism, mental retardation, nystagmus and ataxia. iii) Refsum's syndrome : It is characterized by retinitis pigmentosa, peripheral neuropathy and cerebellar ataxia. iv) Usher's syndrome : It includes retinitis pigmentosa and labyrinthine deafness. v) Hallgren's syndrome : It comprises retinitis pigmentosa, vestibulo-cerebellar ataxia, congenital deafness and mental deficiency.

Question: Glaucoma is caused by -
A. Raised intraocular pressure
B. Raised intracranial Pressure
C. Intraocular infection
D. Orbital mass
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. is 'a' i.e., Raised intraocular pressure The most common risk factor known is increased intraocular pressure (lOP)o Glaucoma is a group of eye diseases causing optic nerve damage i.e., glaucoma is a chronic, progressive optic neuropathy caused by a group of ocular conditions which lead to damage of optic nerveo Optic neuropathy in glaucoma results in a characteristic appearance of optic disc and a specific pattern of irreversible visual field defects, called glaucomatous changes. It is worth noting that raised IOP without optic neuropathy is not referred to as glaucoma, it is simply called ocular hypertension.So, glaucoma is a type of optic neuropathy, which is usually caused by increased IOP.

Question: False about stagardt's disease
A. Autosomal dominant
B. No family history
C. Beaten bronze appearance fundus
D. ERG and EOG both are normal
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Stagardt's disease is autosomal recessive.

Question: Apex national institute of ophthalmology is
A. Advance eye care PGI Chandigarh
B. RIO
C. Dr. R P Centre for Ophthalmic Sciences , Delhi
D. Shankara Netralaya , Chennai
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Dr RP Centre for Ophthalmic Sciences, New Delhi has been designated as the apex national institute of ophthalmology.

Question: Which laser is used in the management of after cataracts:
A. Argon
B. Krypton
C. Nd-YAG
D. Excimer
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. Nd-YAG

Question: Blow out fracture of orbit commonly produces
A. Deviation of septum
B. Retinal haemorrhage
C. Fracture of nasal bones
D. Fracture of floor of orbit
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: (D) Fracture of floor of orbit # Blow out fracture of orbit; Intraorbital haemorrhages, proptosis, paralysis of extrinsic muscles and fracture of the floor of the orbit are not infrequent following a blunt injury to the orbital region> Proptosis develops due to reactive oedema and intra-orbital haemorrhage.> Partial or complete ophthalmoplegia occurs as a result of injury to the muscles or due to profuse orbital oedema.> In the fracture of the floor of orbit, the eyeball is depressed into the maxillary antrum & the inferior rectus and inferior oblique muscles are entrapped causing diplopia.> There occurs limitation of upward gaze, and downward gaze may also be reduced because of the pinched inferior rectus muscle in between the chips of the broken bone> A positive forced duction test, downwards and inwards displacement of the globe and radiological evidence virtually confirm the diagnosis of blowout fracture with incarcerated orbital tissue.> The fracture of the base of skull implicates optic foramen and may cause optic atrophy or pulsating exophthalmos.> The fracture of the optic canal is characterised by a wound at the lateral part of the eyebrow, loss of direct homolateral pupillary reaction and hemianopic field defects.> The patient may suffer from epistaxis and varying periods of unconsciousness.> The pallor of the optic disc may be noticed 2-3 weeks after the injury. Serial radiological tomograms taken at one minute intervals may confirm the diagnosis.

Question: Patient came to the OPD with recent onset photphobia within 24 hours and sloughing corneal ulcer. There is greenish ulcer base. Which of the following can be the causative organism:
A. Acanthamoeba
B. Nocardia
C. Pseudomonas
D. Herpes
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Pseudomonas Ulcer Rapid onset & Greenish ulcer base Produce biofilm that cause resistance MC cause of infection in contact lens users Nocardia ulcer resembles fungal ulcer in its characteristics.

Question: Diplopia is not a presenting feature in:
A. Manifest squint
B. Paralytic squint
C. Latent squint
D. Anisometropia
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: C i.e. Latent squint Hetrophoria or latent strabismus is a condition in which there is a tendency to misalignment of the visual axis, which is corrected by the fusional capacity. Often latent squints give no trouble until the demand of near vision increase the strain. No symptoms arise, perhaps, until after reading or writing for an hour or two when the letter seems to run together'. There diplopia, which is often not appreciated as actual double vision, causes blurring of the print. With effo, blurring is overcome, but eventually this becomes impossible, headache supervenes & the work has to be abandoned. Anisometropia presents with - imperfect binocular vision, amblyopia, squint & diplopia (Basak p-68).

Question: Cataract blindness is:
A. Preventable
B. Curable
C. Avoidable
D. Curable and avoidable
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. Curable

Question: Conjunctiva epithelium is:
A. Pseudostratified
B. Stratified columnar
C. Stratified non keratinized squamous
D. Transitional
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: C i.e. Stratified non keratinized epithelium Conjunctival epithelium is stratified non keratinized squamous epitheliumQ. Conjunctiva has palpebral (marginal, tarsal, orbital), bulbar & fornix pas. Marginal palpebral conjunctiva has transitional zone (not epithelium) covered with stratified epithelium with characteristics of both skin & conjunctiva.

Question: Bitemporal hemianopic field defect is characteristic of:
A. Glaucoma
B. Optic neuritis
C. Pituitary tumor
D. Retinal detachment
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. is 'c' i.e. Pituitary tumour Bitemporal hemianopia results due to central (sagittal) lesion of the optic chiasma, common causes of which are tumors of the pituitary gland, craniopharyngioma, suprasellar meningioma, glioma of third ventricle, chiasmal arachnoiditis, third ventricular dilatation.Sites of lesion of visual path and corresponding field defects. Site of lesionField defect1. Optic nerveIpsilateral blindness2. Proximal part of ONIpsilateral blindness with contralateral hemianopia or superior quadrantanopia3. Central lesion of chiasmaBitemporal hemianopia4. Optic tractHomonymous hemianopia5. Temporal lobeQuadrantic homonymous defect6. Optic radiationHomonymous hemianopia7. Anteriorly in occipital cortexContralateral temporal crescentic field defect8. Occipital lobeHomonymous hemianopia (usually sparing the macula)

Question: Phenol red thread test is used for dry eye. This test-
A. Requires topical anaesthetic agent
B. Volume of tears isn't measured as it changes color on contact with tears
C. If the color changes to blue, it depicts surface mucin deficiency
D. Requiras pH meter for reading result
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: *Phenol red dye test measures the production of tears without topical anesthesia, as the dye changes its color to red on contact with tears. It doesn't require pH meter for reading the result. Ref: Ophthalmology Yanoff and Duker 4th/e p.277

Question: Most common tumor to extend from intracranial to orbit is –
A. Astrocytoma
B. Pituitary adenoma
C. Craniopharyngioma
D. Sphenoidal wing meningioma
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: "Meningiomas are the most common intracranial tumor to extend to the orbit".......... Ophthalmic oncology

Meningiomas commonly arise from the dura of sphenoid wing, i.e. sphenoid wing meningioma.

Question: Stem cells are present where in cornea -
A. Limbus
B. Stroma
C. Epithelium
D. Descmet's membrane
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Answer- A. LimbusLimbal stem cells (also called corneal epithelial stem cells) are stem cells located in the basal epithelial layer of the corneal limbus.Proliferation of limbal stem cells maintains the cornea; for example, replacing cells that are lost tears.Limbal stem cells also prevent the conjunctivalepithelial cells from migrating onto the surface ofthe cornea.

Question: Subconjunctival cyst is seen in?
A. Toxoplasmosis
B. Cysticercosis
C. Leishmaniasis
D. Chaga's disease
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. is b i.e., Cysticercosis Parasitic cysts occurs in subconjunctival cysticercus, hydatid cyst and filarial cyst.

Question: Sixth cranial nerve palsy causes of left eye causes?
A. Accomodation paresis in left gaze
B. Ptosis of left eye
C. Adduction weakness of left eye
D. Diplopia in left gaze
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ans. is 'd' i.e., Diplopia in left gaze o Sixth nerve supplies lateral rectus, therefore its palsy results in abduction weakness (not adduction weakness)o In left gaze, there is abduction of left eye and adduction of right eye. If there is paralysis of lateral rectus of left eye (6th nerve paralysis), abduction of left eye will not be possible in left gaze, while adduction of right eye is normal. Therefore, there will be diplopia in left gaze.

Question: Patient with fixed dilated pupil, with iris atrophy and secondary glaucoma after penetrating keratoplasty is suggestive of:
A. Benedict's syndrome
B. Posner-Shlossman syndrome
C. Kaufmann's syndrome
D. Urrets Zavalia syndrome
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ans. d. Urrets Zavalia syndrome (Ref: style="font-size: 1.04761904761905em; font-family: Times New Roman, Times, serif">icles/PMC1770988)A fixed dilated pupil following penetrating keratoplasty is a well recognized if rare postoperative complication.The mydriasis following penetrating keratoplasty was first described by Castroviejo but it was Urrets-Zavalia who first published his observations on a series of six cases and suggested an association of fixed dilated pupil, iris atrophy, and secondary glaucoma.The pupil can become abnormally dilated following penetrating keratoplasty for keratoconus, particularly if dilating drops are used.In addition to the pupil and iris abnormalities, Urrets-Zavalia also described other features--iris ectropion, pigment dispersion, anterior subcapsular cataract and posterior synechiae.Urrets Zavalia SyndromeUrrets Zavalia Syndrome is characterized by triad of: Secondary glaucoma + Iris atrophy + Fixed dilated pupilQUrrets-Zavalia syndrome (UZS) consists of a fixed dilated pupil associated with iris atrophy.It is a poorly understood complication following penetrating keratoplasty for keratoconus.Posner Shlossman syndromeIt is also called as glaucomatocyclitic crisis.Episodic unilateral mild anterior uveitis, photophobia, reduced vision and colored rings around lights (from secondary corneal edema)Benedict's SyndromeIf red nucleus is involved, tremors and jerky movements occur in contralateral side of the body.This condition combined with ipsilateral 3rd nerve paralysis is called as Benedict's syndrome.McKusick-Kaufmann SyndromeMcKusick-Kaufman syndrome: A rare genetic disorder characterized by hydrometrocolpos (fluid buildup in vagina and uterus), extra fingers and congenital heart defects.

Question: Characteristic visual field defect in optic chiasma lesion -
A. Homonymous hemianopia
B. Bitemporal hemianopia
C. Upper quadrantanopia
D. Lower quadrantanopia
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans, is 'b' i.e,. Bitemporal hemianopia Site of lesionVisual field defectOptic nerveBlindnessOptic cbiasmaBitemporal hemianopiaOptic tractIncongruent homonymous hemianopiaLateral geniculate bodyHomonymous hemianopiaOptic radiation (Total)Homonymous hemianopia, sometimes with macular sparingOptic radiation lower fibres (temporal lobe)Homonymous upper quadrantanopiaOptic radiation upper fibres (parietal lobe)Homonymous lower quadrantanopiaVisual cortex (anterior occipital cortex)Homonymous hemianopia with macular sparingOccipital cortex tipHomonymous macular defect

Question: Uveitis is associated most commonly with :
A. Rheumatoid arthritis
B. Systemic JRA
C. Pauciarticular JRA
D. Poly articular JRA
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. is 'c' ie Pauciarticular JRA Uveitis can be seen in both pauciarticular and polyarticular JRA but is much more commonly associated with pauciarticular JRA.It is seen in about 20-25% of cases of pauciarticular and only 5% of polyarticular JRA.

Question: Keratic precipitates are most commonly seen in -
A. Corneal ulcers
B. Uveitis
C. Nuclear cataracts
D. Keratoconus
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. is 'b' i.e., Uveitis o Keratic precipitates (KPs) are proteinaceous cellular deposits occurring at the back of cornea (corneal endothelial deposits). Keratic precipitates are formed by the aggregation of polymorphonuclear cells, lymphocytes, and epitheloid cells. In the setting of uveitis, the bimicrosopic appearance of KP may yeild important diagnostic clues for the identification of the underlying inflammatory disorder1) Mutton fat KP Large, yellowish KPs, are characteristic of granulomatous uveitis .These are composed of epitheloid cells and macrophages. They are large, thick fluffy, lardaceous KPs, having a greasy or waxy appearance.2) Small or medium KPs (granular KPs):- These are composed of lymphocytes and are characteristic of nongranulomatous uveitis. These are small, round and whitish precipitates3) Red KPs:- Composed of RBCs and inflammatory cells. These are seen in hemorrhagic uveitis.4) Old KPs:- In healed uveitis. The above described KPs shrink, fade, become pigmented and irregular in shape with crenated margins.

Question: Regarding spring catarrh, all of the following are true, except:
A. Cobblestone appearance of conjunctiva
B. Common in spring months
C. Limbus conjunctival thickening
D. Sodium cromoglycate is a form of therapy
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Limbus conjunctival thickening

Question: All of the following causes coloured halos except
A. Corneal edema
B. Retinal degeneration
C. Foreign body
D. Steroids
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Halos can sometimes be a normal response to bright lights. Halos can also be caused by wearing eyeglasses or corrective lenses (contact lenses), or they can be a side effect of cataract or LASIK surgery. ... Thehalos are a result in diffraction of light entering your eye

Question: Ocular manifestation in giant cell arteritis?
A. Arteritic AION
B. Nonarteritic AION
C. Papilledema
D. Horners Syndrome
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. a. Arteritic AIONAION occurs due to interference of blood supply to anterior part of optic nerve (posterior ciliary artery)AION can be clinically differentiated into:Arteritic AIONNonarteritic AION*. Due to giant cell arteritis*. Due to occlusion of short posterior ciliary artery*. Sudden, severe visual loss (6/60)*. Sudden, moderate visual loss (>60/60 non-progressive)*. Most common in females, 7-8th decade*. Most common males, 5th-6th decade*. Premonitory symptoms like pain, Amaurosis Fugax present*. Premonitory symptoms like pain, Amaurosis Fugax absent*. Usually Bilateral-fellow eye affected within days to weeks*. Usually Unilateral (>70%)*. Pale optic disc*. Hyperemic optic with small cup*. Poor prognosis*. Good prognosis

Question: Most Common Tumour of Eyelid is:
A. Sebaceeous Ca
B. BCC
C. SCC
D. Malignant melanoma
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: BCC

Question: What is the treatment of threshold ROP?
A. laser photocoagulation
B. slow reduction in oxygen
C. retinal reattachment
D. antioxidants
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans is 'a' i.e. Laser Photocoagulation Threshold disease in ROP is defined as stage 3+ ROP in Zones 1 or 2 occupying at least five contiguous clock-hours or eight noncontiguous clock-hours of retina.Treatment of threshold disease is Laser Photocoagulation.'Laser therapy has largely replaced cryotherapy because visual and anatomical outcomes are superior and laser induces less myopia. " -Kanski 6/e p610Other options:Antioxidants like vit E and slow reduction in 02 has no role in established ROP (threshold disease in our patient); although both are mentioned in few texts for prevention of ROP and even that is not well proven.Retinal reattachment is required when retina is detached like in stage 4 and 5 while Threshold disease is Stage 3 + disease.Also know:"Low birth weight and decreased gestational age are now considered the primary causative factors for ROP. Supplemental oxygen administration which was for a long time considered as the important causative factor is now considered only a risk factor. " - Khuran Ophthalmology 4/e p264 "ROP is confined to those with a birth weight of under 1.5 kg and/or a gestational age of under 32 wks. "- Parson 21/e P310 The hallmark of retinopathy of prematurity (ROP) is abnormal retinal vasculature. Ophthalmologists diagnose and make decisions about the initial treatment of ROP based on the appearance of the retinal blood vessels. Dilatation and tortuosity of the retinal vessels at the posterior pole is termed 'plus' disease. It is a sign of rapidly progressive ROP and is an indication for early laser ablation of the peripheral avascular retina.Retinopathy of prematurity (ROP)ROP is a bilateral proliferative retinopathy that develops in premature infants due to incomplete vasculogenesis of retina at the time of birth.During normal retinal development, vessels migrate from the optic disc to the ora serrata beginning at 16weeks of gestation. Capillary network is formed differentiating into mature vessels which extend to nasal ora by 36 wks and tangential ora by 39-41 wks.The pathogenesis of ROP begins with premature birth. Exposure of extrauterine environment causes phases of hyperoxia-vasocessation (obliteration of retinal vessels) and hypoxia-Vaso proliferation (neovascularization). VEGF is thought to be the most important molecule involved in the neovascularization.Neovascularization leads to retinal and vitreous changes which ultimately lead to retinal detachment.Classification of ROP:ROP is described using a number of parameters. These are location of the disease into zones (1, 2, and 3), the circumferential extent of the disease based on the clock hours (1-12), the severity of the disease (stage 1-5) and the presence or absence of "Plus Disease".Classification on the basis of severity, ROP is divided into 5 stages:-Stage I- the first sign of ROP (stage 1) is the appearance of a thin, fiat, white structure (termed a demarcation line) at the junction of vascularized retina posteriorly and avascular retina anteriorly.Stage II- the demarcation line develops into a pink or white elevation (ridge) of thickened tissueStage III- proliferation of vessels over the ridge and into vitreous (extra vitreal fibrovascular proliferation)Stage IV- partial retinal detachmentIVa- partial detachment with macular sparing IVb- partial detachment with macula involvedStage V- total retinal detachmentClassification on basis of anatomical location:-Since there is a direct correlation between severity of disease and amount of avascular retina, the location of the border between vascularized and avascular retina is an important prognostic sign.3 zones are divided to describe the location of ROP. Location of the border in zone 1 is the most severe disease and in zone 3 least.Zone 1 is defined as a circle, the center of which is the disc, and the radius of which is twice the distance of the disc to the fovea.Zone 2 is a doughnut-shaped region that extends from the anterior border of Zone 1 to within one disc-diameter of the ora serrata nasally and to the anatomic equator temporally.Zone 3 encompasses the residual temporal retina.Plus disease:- As ROP progresses, more and more shunting occurs in the neovascular tissue at the retinal vascular- avascular junction. This increased retinal vascular blood flow results in dilation and tortuosity of the major retinal arteries and veins in the posterior pole - described as "plus disease". Plus disease is the hallmark of rapidly progressive ROP and is notated by adding a plus sign after the number of the ROP stage.Management:Most of the cases (approx. 80%) of ROP resolve spontaneously, hence intervention is chosen according to the below given protocol.ROP is divided into Threshold and Pre threshold disease.Threshold disease: It is defined as stage 3+ ROP in Zones 1 or 2 occupying at least five contiguous clock-hours or eight noncontiguous clock-hours of retina.Treatment of Threshold disease is - Laser photocoagulation.Pre threshold disease is divided into 2 types:High risk or Type I - treatment is Laser photocoagulationLow risk or Type II - treatment is Weekly or Twice weekly observationType 1 Pre thresholdType 2 Pre thresholdZone I ROP (any stage) + Zone I, Stage 3 Zone II, Stage 2/3 +Zone I, Stage 1/2 - Zone II, Stage 3 -Laser PhotocoagulationWeekly or Twice weekly observationROP diseases less severe than Pre threshold are followed up.In this question, the child with zone 1, stage II 'plus' ROP falls into Pre threshold disease- Type 1 or high risk type, hence Laser Photocoagulation would be the management of choice.

Question: Diplopia is usually seen in ?
A. Paralytic squint
B. Non-paralytic squint
C. Both of the above
D. None of the above
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. is 'a' i.e., Paralytic squint

Question: Orange-skin cornea results due to:
A. Chalcosis
B. Siderosis
C. Ammonia burn
D. Mustard gas
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ans. Mustard gas

Question: What is irregular astigmatism-
A. Perpendicular principal meridians
B. Non perpendicular principal meridians
C. Any of the above
D. None of the above
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. is 'b' i.e., Non perpendicular principal meridians ASTIGMATISMo Astigmatism is a type of refractive error wherein the refraction varies in the different meridia. Consequently, the rays of light entering in the eye cannot converge to a point focus but form focal lines. The refractive error of the astigmatic eye stems from a difference in degree of curvature refraction of the two different meridians (i.e.,, the eye has different focal point in different planes). For example, the image may be clearly focused on retina in the horizontal plane, but not in the vertical plane.o The most common cause of astigmatism is abnormality of corneal curvature. Other less common causes are lenticular (curvature abnormality of lens,oblique position of lens) and retinal (oblique placement of macula). Types of astigmatismBased on axis of the principal meridiansRegular stigmatism : Principal meridians are perpendicularo With-the-rule astigmatism-the vertical meridian is steepest.o Against-the-rule astigmatism-the horizontal meridian is steepest.o Oblique astigmatism-the steepest curve lies in between 120 and 150 degrees and 30 and 60 degrees.Irregular astigmatism - principal meridians are not perpendicular.Based on focus of the principal meridiansSimple astigmatismo Simple hyperopic astigmatism - first focal line is on retina while the second is located behind the retinao Simple myopic astigmatism - first focal line is in front of the retina while the second is on the retina.Compound astigmatismo Compound hyperopic astigmatism-both focal lines are located behind the retina,o Compound myopic astigmatism-both focal lines are located in front of the retina.Mixed astigmatism-focal lines are on both sides of the retina (straddling the retina).Treatment of Astigmatismo Treatment of astigmatism consists : -Optical treatment: - It consists of cylindrical power spectacles or contact lens. Types of contact lenses used are permeable contact tens, Soft toric contact lens (for high degree astigmatism), hybrid lens, i.e,, soft on hard lens, hard contact lens.Surgical treatment: - Non-laser (astigmatic keratotomy) or laser (PRK, LASIK).

Question: Pterygium all are true except:
A. Arise from any pa of conjunctiva
B. Can cause astigmatism
C. Surgery is treatment of choice
D. UV exposure is risk factor
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. Arise from any pa of conjunctiva

Question: Which of the gene is most often implicated in congenital cataract and alpha crystallin mutation?
A. GLC3A
B. PAX6
C. PITX2
D. CRYAA
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: CRYAA is implicated in congenital cataract and alpha crystallin mutation.

Question: Most common cause of unilateral proptosis is
A. Thyrotoxicosis
B. Retinoblastoma
C. Intraocular haemorrhage
D. Raised intracranial tension
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: A i.e. Thyrotoxicosis Grave's ophthalmopathy is most common cause of U/L or B/L proptosis in adults Q between age of 25-50 yrsQ

Question: Normal axial length of the eye -
A. 18mm
B. 20 mm
C. 24mm
D. 28 mm
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. is 'c' i.e., 24 mm o The length of the eyeball is approximately 24 mm, So the distances from the cornea / crystalline lens to the retina and the focal length of optical rays focused by the comea/crystalline lens propagating in the vitreous humor and imaging on the retina, are also about 24 mm.Dimensiosn of an adult eyeAnteroposterior diameter (Length)24 mmHorizontal diameter23-5mmVertical diameter23 mmCircumference75 mmVolume6-5 mlWeight7 gm

Question: Baby born prematurely at 29 wks, on examination at 42 weeks with ROP, both eyes shows stage 2 zone 1 `plus' disease, how will you manage the patient ?
A. Examine the patient after 1 week
B. Laser photocoagulation of both eyes
C. Laser photocoagulation of worse eye, follow up of other eye
D. Vitreoretinal surgery
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: The hallmark of retinopathy of prematurity (ROP) is abnormal retinal vasculature. Ophthalmologists diagnose and make decisions about the initial treatment of ROP based on the appearance of the retinal blood vessels. Dilatation and tortuosity of the retinal vessels at the posterior pole is termed plus' disease. It is a sign of rapidly progressive ROP and is an indication for early laser ablation of the peripheral avascular retina.

Question: Earliest clinical feature of Senile cataract
A. Glare
B. Frequent change of glasses
C. Coloured halos
D. Uniocular polyopia
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Earliest clinical feature of Senile cataract is Glare
Most common symptom at presentation is Frequent change of glasses

Question: Features of vernal keratoconjunctivitis are – a) Papillary hypertrophyb) Follicular hypertrophyc) Herbert's pitsd) Tantra\'s Spote) Ciliary congestion
A. b
B. c
C. ac
D. ad
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Papillary hypertrophy into polygonal papilla is arranged in cobblestone or pavement stone fashion.

Question: Retinoscopy is done for:
A. Examination of Retina
B. Assessing surface of cornea
C. Refractive errors
D. Examination of vitreous
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Retinoscopy is an objective method of finding out the error of refraction by the method of neutralization.The end point of neutralization is either no movement or just reversal of the movement of the pupillaryshadow. Depending upon the movement of the red reflexvis-a-vis movement of the plane mirror, Following infrences are drawan No movement of the red reflex indicates myopia of 1D.With movement - emmetropia or hypermetropia or myopia of lessthan 1D.Against movement -myopia of more than 1D.

Question: SAFE strategy use in
A. Inclusion conjunctivitis
B. Ophthalmia neonatorum
C. Trachoma
D. Haemorrhagic conjunctivitis
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: SAFE strategy - for prophylaxis against trachoma and prevention of blindness S - Surgery for trichiasis - Teiary prevention A - Antibiotic - AZITHROMYCIN (D/O/C) - secondary prevention F - Facial hygiene - primary prevention E - Environmental changes - primordial prevention

Question: True regarding amaurosis fugax are all except:
A. Transient, recurrent episodes of visual loss
B. Binocular lesion
C. Embolus from carotid aery is commonest cause
D. Ocular examination may be normal
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Amaurosis fugax Sudden, temporary and painless monocular visual loss occurring due to a transient failure of retinal circulation. Uniocular lesion Lasts for 2-5 minutes and resolves in the reverse pattern of progression, leaving no residual deficit. Fundus : May be normal or shows retinal ischemia-Retinal oedema and small superficialhaemorrhages Causes : Carotid transient ischaemic attacks (TIA) Embolization of retinal circulation Papilloedema Giant cell aeritis Raynaud's disease Migraine Hypeensive retinopathy Venous stasis retinopathy

Question: Best way to prevent infection after cataract surgery is
A. Antibiotics
B. Eye brow shaving
C. Through irrigation
D. None of the above
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Topical antibiotics such as tobramycin or gentamicin or ciprofloxacin QID for 3 days just before surgery is advisable as prophylaxis against endophthalmitis.Ref: Khurana; 4th edition; Pg- 184

Question: Interstitial keratitis is commonly seen in: March 2005
A. Fungal keratitis
B. Congenital syphilis
C. Phlyctenular keratitis
D. Trachoma
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. B: Congenital syphilis It develop from host immune mechanisms to active infections or antigens within the stromal keratocytes. Diseases known to cause interstitial keratitis include: congenital syphilis, herpes simplex, herpes zoster, Epstein-Barr, tuberculosis and leprosy. Clinical manifestations: superficial stromal scarring, necrotizing stromal keratitis and disciform keratitis. As the inflammation subsides, intracorneal blood vessels will regress and become nonperfused vascular channels, which are known as "ghost" vessels. These vessels can be readily visualized using slit lamp biomicroscopy and can become active if inflammation recurs.

Question: The most commonly seen primary orbital tumour in children is
A. Optic nerve sheath meningioma
B. Retinoblastoma
C. Rhabdomyosarcoma
D. Glioma of optic nerve
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Rhabdomyosarcoma It is a highly malignant tumour of the orbit arising from the extraocular muscles. It is the most common primary orbital tumour among children, usually occurring below the age of 15 years (90%). Clinical features: It classically presents as rapidly progressive proptosis of sudden onset in a child of 7-8 years. Massive proptosis due to rhabdomyosarcoma located in the superonasal quadrant (mimmicking acute inflammatory process). The clinical presentation mimics an inflammatory process. The tumour commonly involves the superionasal quadrant; but may invade any pa of the orbit. Ref:- A K KHURANA; pg num:-394

Question: Length of naso lacrimal duct is:
A. 10 mm
B. 11 mm
C. 12 mm
D. 9 mm
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. 12 mm

Question: A 65yr old male with his of Diabetes and HTN presents Ito OPD with complaints of diplopia and squint on examination secondary detion is seen to be more than primary detion Which of the following is the most probable diagnosis
A. Paralytic squint
B. Incomitant squint
C. Restrictive squint
D. Pseudo squint
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: ref : ak khurana 7th ed

Question: All are common causes of childhood blindness except
A. Malnutrition
B. Glaucoma
C. Ophthalmia neonatorum
D. Congenital dacryocystitis
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Congenital dacryocystitis [Ref: Khurana 4/e,p 369, 447; Parson's 20/e, p 530-531 Repeat from May07 Causes of impaired vision in childhood Anatomical classification Whole globe: microphthalmos, anophthalmos, phthisis bulbi, atrophic bulbi Cornea: scar, anterior staphyloma, dystrophy Lens: cataract, dislocation, aphakia Uvea: aniridia, coloboma, uveitis Retina: retinopathy of prematurity, retinal dystrophy, retinal detachment, vasculitis Glaucoma: buphthalmos Optic nerve optic atrophy, hypoplasia Other: coical blindness, amblyopia Aetiological classification Hereditary: chromosomal disorders, single-gene defects Intrauterine: congenital rubella, foetal alcohol syndrome Perinatal: ophthalmia neonatorum, retinopathy of prematurity, bih trauma Childhood: vitamin A deficiency, measles, trauma Unclassified: impossible to determine the underlying cause Congenital dacryocystitis (also k/a dacryocystitis neonatorum) is an inflammation of the lacrimal sac occurring in newborn infants, and thus also known as dacryocystitis neonatorum it is d/t stasis of secretion in the lacrimal following congenital blockage in the nasolacrimal duct. congenital dacryocystis presents as - epiphora, usually developing after 7 days of bih, followed by copious mucopurulent discharge from the eyes - swelling on the sac area It may be complicated by - recurrent conjunctivitis - acute on chronic dacryocistitis - lacrimal abscess & fistula formation

Question: Type of laser used for capsulotomy is:
A. CO2
B. Ruby
C. Nd:YAG
D. Argon
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. Nd:YAG

Question: A young patient presented with sudden painless loss of vision with systolic murmur over chest, ocular examination reveals - cherry red spot in macula with clear AC, with perception of light, diagnosis:
A. Central retinal aery occlusion
B. Central retinal vein occlusion
C. Macular choroiditis with infective endocarditis
D. Central serous retinopathy
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: A i.e. Central retinal aery occlusion All the above can lead to sudden painless loss of vision, but Cherry-Red Spot is seen only in CRAO Sudden Painful Painless * Acute * Macular edema congestive * CRAO Q (central retinal aery (angle occlusion) closure) * CRVO Q (central retinal vein occlusion) glaucoma Q * Central serous retinopathy * Acute * Retinal detachment Q iridocyclitis * Exudative Age Related Macular (uveitis) Q Degeneration (ARMD) * Chemical & * Vitreous & retinal haemorrhage (eg mechanical Eale's disease) Q injury to * Optic neuritis Q eyeball * Methyl alcohol amblyopia * Subluxation or dislocation of lens Gradual Painful Painless * Corneal * Progressive pterygium ulceration * Corneal dystrophy * Chronic * Corneal degeneration simple * Cataract Q (developmental & senile) glaucoma * Chorioretinal degeneration * Chronic * Dry type - Age related macular iridocyclitis degeneration (ARMD) Q (uveitis) * Diabetic retinopathy Q * Retinitis pigmentosa Q * Optic atrophy Q * Refractive errors * Preshyopia Cherry Red Spot Macula is situated at posterior pole with its centre (foveola) being about 2 disc diameters lateral to temporal margin of disc. When retina becomes milky white due to edema, central pa of macular are shows cherry red spot due to vascular choroid shining through the thin retina of this region. Cause are:- 1. Quinine amblyopia 2. Niemann-Pick's diseaseQ 3. Metachromatic leukodystrophyQ 4. Multiple sulfatase deficiencyQ 5. Taysach's diseaseQ (GM2 gangliosidosis type 1) 6. Berlin's oedema / Commotio retinaeQ due to blunt blow on eye 7. Central Retinal Aery occlusion (CRAO)Q (not in CRVO)Q 8. Gaucher's diseaseQ, Goldberg syndrome 9. Generalized gangliosidosis (Gml gangliosidosis type 1)Q 10. Sandhoff disease (Gm2 gangliosidosis type 2, sphingolipidosis) 11. Sialidosis type 1 & 2 (cherry red spot myoclonus syndrome, sphingolipidosis) 12. Farber's disease 13. Hurler's syndrome (Mucopolysaccharidosis 1H), HallervordenSpatz disease 14. Mucopolysachharidosis VII (3 galactosidase deficiency)

Question: Best IOL is –
A. Anterior chamber
B. Posterior chamber
C. Iris supported
D. Angle supported
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: The best position of IOL is within the capsular bag in posterior chamber.

Question: Treatment of choice for Aniseikonia
A. Ohoptic exercise
B. Spectacles
C. Surgery
D. Contact lens
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Treatment 1. Optical aniseikonia may be corrected by aniseikonic glasses, contact lenses or intraocular lenses depending upon the situation. 2. For retinal aniseikonia treat the cause. 3. Coical aniseikonia is very difficult to treat. Image : Aniseikonia Reference : A K KHURANA OPHTALMOLOGY,Edition 4,Page-39

Question: The mode of action of Lanatoprost in glaucoma:
A. Increasing trabecular outflow
B. Releasing pupillary block
C. Decreasing aqueous humour formation
D. Increasing uveoscleral outflow
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Lantanoprost is prastoglandin in nature and decrease the intraocular pressure by increasing uveoscleral outflow of aqueous humour. It is very good adjunctive therapy along with betablockers, dorzolamide and pilocarpine. Ref: A.K KHURANA (2005), Chapter 9, "Glaucoma", In the book, "Opthalmology", 3rd Edition, Newdelhi, Page 229 ; KDT 5th Edition, Page 88

Question: Temporal pallor in optic disc seen in all except
A. Optic neuritis
B. Compression of optic nerve
C. Leber's hereditary optic neuritis
D. Glaucoma
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Optic atrophy, pallor of the optic nerve head, is a sign found in patients with visual loss due to pathology of the optic nerve or retinal ganglion cells. ... It refers topallor of the optic disc which results from irreversible damage to the retinal ganglion cells and axons. It is commonly seen in Optic neuritis Compress of optic nerve Leber's hereditary optic neuritis Ref AK khurana 6/e p459

Question: Drugs causing macular toxicity when given intravitreally-
A. Gentamycin
B. Vancomycin
C. Dexamethasone
D. Ceftazidime
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. is 'a' i.e., Gentamycino Intravitreal aminoglycosides (gentamycin, amikacin) are a reported cause of macular toxicity.o Aminoglycosides induced macular toxicity is thought to be partially due to the gravity-induced settling of drugs on the macula in supine position.o This may result in a higher concentration of drug locally at the macula.

Question: Optical media are clear in:
A. Cavernous sinus thrombosis
B. Orbital cellulitis
C. Both of the above
D. None of the above
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. Both of the above

Question: A case of injury to right brow due to a fall from scooter present with sudden loss of vision in the right eye.The pupil shows absent direct reflex but a normal consensual pupillary reflex is present. The fundus is normal. The treatment of choice is-
A. Intensive intravenous corticosteroids as prescribed for spinal injuries to be instituted within six hours
B. Pulse methyl Prednisolone 250 mg four times daily for three days
C. Oral Prednisolone 1.5 mg/kg body weight
D. Emergency optic canal decompression
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Sudden loss of vision, absent Ipsilateral direct light reflex and normal ipsilateral consensual light reflex suggest the diagnosis of optic nerve injury.
Within 8 hours of injury megadose of iv steroid (methylprednisolone) should be given. If there is no response or deterioration, optic canal decompression should be done. If vision is improving, steroids should be tapered gradually. If on tapering steroids, vision deteriorates, optic canal decompression is indicated.

Question: Not a common cause of night blindness:
A. Cataract
B. RP
C. Oguchi disease
D. Pathological myopia
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Cataract is not a common cause of night blindness. Other causes are more recognized causes. Causes of Night Blindness Vitamin A deficiency (first symptom is red-green differentiation anomaly) Pathological myopia Tapetoretinal degenerations{eg. Retinitis pigmentosa(RP)} Familial congenital night blindness Oguchi's disease

Question: Marcus Gunn pupil is due to -
A. Total afferent pupillary defect
B. Relative afferent pupillary defect
C. Efferent pathway defect
D. Cerebral lesion
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: The Relative Afferent Pupillary Defect (RAPD), or Marcus-Gunn Pupil is an extremely significant and highly objective clinical finding in the examination of the visual system. The "swinging flashlight test" is probably the best test for identifying an RAPD. In this test, a strong, steady light is used. The light is shined into one eye, and then quickly switched to the other. This is repeated back and foh, until one of four conclusions is reached (listed below). Since light in one pupil causes both pupils to constrict, quickly switching from one eye to the other will give a "relative" indication of the functioning of each eye and optic nerve. If both eyes are equally dysfunctional, no "relative" defect would be found.

Question: Patient came with hydrops and scarring of cornea. What would be the treatment modality you would opt for him:
A. Penetrating Keratoplasty
B. Endothelial lamellar Keratoplasty
C. Deep anterior lamellar keratoplasty
D. Collagen cross linking
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Penetrating keratoplasty has to be done in cases of deep corneal scar or hydrops. SURGICAL MODALITIES FOR KERATOCONUS Keratoplasty for Keratoconus DALK (deep anterior Lamellar keratoplasty): when > 1/2 of stroma is involved. ALTK (Anterior lamellar therapeutic keratoplasty) : When less than 1/2 of stroma is involved. Penetrating Keratoplasty: When full thickness of cornea is involved as in hydrops with scar. INTRASTROMAL CORNEAL RING SEGMENTS Reduce corneal steepening Made of PMMA. Femtolaser is used to make tunnel in cornea. Used in Pellucid Marginal Degeneration, post LASIK ectasia and keratoconus.

Question: Neovascularisation is seen in
A. Central vein obstruction
B. Central retinal aery obstruction
C. Branch retinal vein obstruction
D. All of the above.
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: A i.e. Central vein obstruction

Question: Dislocation of lens is seen in:
A. Trachoma
B. Diabetes mellitus
C. Homocystinuria
D. Turner's syndrome
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: C i.e. Homocystinuria

Question: True about keratoconus are all of the following except: September 2005
A. Can be seen in Down's syndrome
B. It manifests just after bih
C. Munson sign is characteristic
D. Corneal transplantation is needed in severe cases
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. B: It manifests just after bih Keratoconus is frequently due to a congenital weakness of the cornea, though it manifests itself after pubey. However it can occur secondarily following trauma or Down's syndrome. Keratoconus is divided into mild, moderate, and advanced. Mild keratoconus - External and corneal signs are often absent or minimal. - A history of multiple inadequate spectacle corrections of one or both eyes may be noted and may include oblique astigmatism on refraction as well as moderate-to-high myopia. - Irregularly astigmatic keratometry values (egg-shaped), not necessarily on the steep side of normal (approximately 45 diopters (D)), are consistent with diagnosis. Diagnosis can be confirmed with computer-assisted videokeratography, which may reveal corneal inferior steepening (approximately 80% of keratoconus cases), central corneal astigmatic steepening (approximately 15% of keratoconus cases), or even bilateral temporal steepening (extremely rare). Diagnosis may also be aided by applying a diagnostic rigid contact lens with its base curve equal to the flat keratometry value. One observes a typical nipple pattern by use of sodium fluorescein dye in the underlying tear film. Moderate keratoconus One or more corneal signs of keratoconus are often present. Enhanced appearance of the corneal nerves is noted. Approximately 40% of eyes in patients with moderate keratoconus develop Vogt striae (fine-stress lines) in the deep stroma. Approximately 50% develop the deposition of iron in the basal epithelial cells in a (often paial) ring shape at the base of the conical protrusion called the Fleischer ring. Approximately 20% develop corneal scarring. Superficial corneal scarring can be fibular, nebular, or nodular. Deep stromal scarring may occur, perhaps representing resolved mini-hydrops events. Some patients show scarring at the level of the Descemet membrane (posterior limiting lamina), consistent in appearance with posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy. Paraxial (usually inferior to the pupil) stromal thinning may be appreciated. Keratometry values typically increase to 45-52 D. Distoion of the retinoscopy and direct ophthalmoscope red pupillary reflex may allow observation of "scissoring" or an inferior distoion termed the oil drop sign. The Munson sign is noted when, upon downgaze, a "V" shape is noted in the cornea's profile against the lower lid margin, an accentuation of the conical shape of the modest to advanced keratoconus cornea. Advanced keratoconus This often results in keratometry values greater than 52 D and enhancement of all corneal signs, symptoms, and visual loss/distoion. Vogt striae are seen in approximately 60% of eyes, and Fleischer ring and/or scarring are seen in approximately 70% of eyes. Acute corneal hydrops can occur. Treatment: In the early stages, vision may be improved with spectacles but contact lens are more beneficial as they eliminate the irregular corneal curvature. If the disease progresses and the cone hydrated, the most satisfactory treatment is corneal transplantation.

Question: All are the causes of neovascular glaucoma except:
A. Intraocular tumour
B. Central retinal vein occlusion
C. Diabetic retinopathy
D. Central serous retinopathy
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ans. Central serous retinopathy

Question: The commonest cranial nerve palsy in tabes dorasalis is:
A. III nerve
B. IV nerve
C. VI nerve
D. Total ophthalmoplegia
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. III nerve

Question: Sunflower cataract is caused by
A. Siderosis
B. Chalcosis
C. Lead intoxication
D. Silicosis
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Chalcosis is copper alloy in the eye Refer: Khurana 6th edition page number 194

Question: A patient presents to the emergency department with uniocular diplopia. Examination with oblique illumination shows golden crescent while examination with coaxial illumination show a dark crescent line. Which of the following is the most likely diagnosis –
A. Lenticonus
B. Coloboma
C. Microspherophakia
D. Ectopia lentis
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Presence of uniocular diplopia together with the finding of the golden crescent on oblique illumination (edge of subluxated lens) or black crecent line on coaxial illumination (edge of subluxated lens) suggests a diagnosis of `subluxation' of the crystalline lens. Ectopic lens refers to the displacement of shows lens from its normal position (subluxation, dislocation).

Question: 'Rosette cataract' is caused by:
A. Diabetes
B. After cataract
C. Trauma
D. Gaucher's disease
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. c (Trauma) (Ref: Parson's Disease of Eye 19th/pg. 283; Basak Ophthalmology 2nd/pg. 82, 305).CATARACTContusion cataractContusion of the eyeball will produce a rosette-shaped subcapsular opacity on the anterior surface of the lens. It will normally remain unchanged but will migrate into the deeper cortex over time due to the apposition of new fibers.Lamellar (Zonular) cataractIt is the most common developmental cataract.Opacities are located in one layer of lens fibers, often as "riders" only in the equatorial region.Nuclear cataractIn the fourth decade of life, the pressure of peripheral lens fiber production causes hardening of the entire lens, especially the nucleus. The nucleus takes on a yellowish brown color (brunescent nuclear cataract). This may range from reddish brown to nearly black discoloration of the entire lens (black cataract). Nuclear cataracts develop very slowly. Due to the lenticular myopia, near vision (even without eyeglasses) remains good for a long time.Cortical cataractNuclear cataracts are often associated with changes in the lens cortex. It is interesting to note that patients with cortical cataracts tend to have acquired hyperopia in contrast to patients with nuclear cataracts, who tend to be myopic.# Berlin's edema (commotio retinae) is a condition caused by blunt injury to the eye. Berlin's edema is an acute traumatic maculopathy characterized by retinal opacification. Histopathologic studies have shown that it is characterized by disruption of photoreceptor outer segments and retinal pigment epithelial damage. OCT an effective tool for management of patients with posterior segment trauma. OCT is more comfortable for the traumatized patient than other imaging techniques because it is a non-contact method utilizing infrared illumination. OCT is also highly sensitive in identifying subtle anatomic changes.Educational points: CataractFeatureAfter-cataract (Post cap opacity)Elschnig pearl & Rings of SoemerringsBrown/Cataract brunescensNuclear/hard cataractBlack cataract/Cataract nigransNuclear/hard cataractBlue dot cataract (Punctate)Most common congenital cataractComplicated cataract'Bread crumb' appearanceConcussion cataract'Rossete-shaped' cataractCoronary cataractDevelopmental cataract at pubertyChalcosisSunflower cataractDiabetic cataract'Snow flake/storm' appearanceHypermature senile cataractMorgagnian cataractLamellar/ZonularRidersMyotonic dystrophyCataract with polychromatic dots ("Christmas-tree")

Question: Which of the following is an ocular emergency ?
A. CRAO
B. Optic neuritis
C. Acute congestive glaucoma
D. All of the above
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ans. is 'd' i.e., All of the above Ocular emergencies include those conditions that result in acute, severe pain in association with sudden vision loss, or that may lead to vision loss if left untreated; and traumatic conditions that affect globe or adnexa. Comon ophthalmic emergencies are :- Acute congestive glaucoma Ruptured globe Ulcerative or traumatic corneal diseases Optic neuritis Hyphema Endophthalmitis Acute blindness Orbital cellulitis Eyelid or conjunctival laceration Central retinal aerial occlusion (CRAG) Anterior lens subluxation Retinal detachment

Question: Which of the following disease shows autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance?
A. Best's disease
B. Bassen-Kornzwig disease
C. Gyrate atrophy
D. Laurence-Moon-Biedle syndrome
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Best's disease is an autosomal dominant disorder with variable penetrance and expressivity. Bassen-Kornzwig disease is an autosomal recessive inherited disorder of lipoprotein metabolism. Gyrate atrophy is an autosomal recessive dystrophy with peripheral choroidal degeneration. Laurence-Moon-Biedle syndrome is also inherited in autosomal recessive manner. Best's disease: It is caused by a mutation in the BEST1 (VMD2) gene, which encodes a transmembrane calcium-sensitive chloride channel (bestrophin) expressed in retinal pigment epithelium. Fundus examination ranges from a mild pigmentary disturbance within the fovea to the typical vitelliform or "egg yoke" lesion located in the central macula. Visual acuity is good and electro retinogram is normal. An abnormal electro-oculogram (EOG) is the hallmark of the disease. Ref: Vaughan & Asbury's General Ophthalmology, 18 Edition, Chapter 10

Question: The early changes in coicosteroid-induced cataract are in the form of:
A. Central posterior subcapsular lens changes
B. Anterior coical lens changes
C. Nuclear changes
D. Diffuse lens changes
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. Central posterior subcapsular lens changes

Question: A person with defective blue color appreciation is called ?
A. Deuteranomalous
B. Deuteranopia
C. Tritanopia
D. Tritanomalous
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ans. is `d' i.e., Tritanomalous

Question: Which of the following is not an ophthalmic emergency:
A. Macular hole
B. Retinal Detachment
C. CRAO
D. Acute primary angle closure glaucoma
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. Macular hole

Question: Blindness in child is most commonly due to
A. Keratomalacia
B. Congenital cataract
C. Glaucoma
D. Injuries
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Most common cause of childhood blindness is vitamin A deficiency Refer: Khurana 6th edition page number 382

Question: Homonymous hemianopia may be seen in lesion of all of the following, EXCEPT:
A. Optic chiasma
B. Optic tract
C. Optic radiation
D. Occipital lobe
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Lesion of the optic chiasma result in bitemporal hemianopia not homonymous hemianopia. Lesions of the visual pathway and corresponding field defects: Lesion of optic nerve: Ipsilateral blindness Lesion through proximal pa of optic nerve: Ipsilateral blindness with contralateral quadrantanopia. Lesion of optic tract: Homonymous hemianopia Lesion of temporal lobe: Quadrantic homonymous defect Lesion of optic radiation: Homonymous hemianopia with occasional sparing of the macula Lesion in anterior pa of occipital coex: Contralateral temporal crescentic field defect Lesion of occipital lobe: homonymous hemianopia usually sparing of the macula Ref: Textbook of Ophthalmology By H. V. Nema, page 340

Question: Commonest cause of loss of vision in non- proliferative diabetic retinopathy is –
A. Vitreous heamorrhage
B. Macular edema
C. Detachment of retina
D. Subretinal haemorrhage
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Macular edema is the most common cause of loss of vision in NPDR.

Question: Most common tumor to extend from intracranial to orbit is-
A. Astrocytoma
B. Pituitary adenoma
C. Craniopharyngioma
D. Sphenoidal wing meningioma
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: *Meningiomas commonly arise from the dura of sphenoid wing, i.e.sphenoid wing meningioma. Ref:Opthalmic oncology p.84.

Question: Inclusion conjunctivitis is caused by:
A. Chlamydia trachomatis
B. Chlamydia psittaci
C. Herpes
D. Gonorrhoea
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. is 'a' i.e. Chlamydia trachomatis Inclusion conjunctivitis is caused by chlamydia trachomatis (serotypes D- K).Chlamydial inclusion conjunctivitis is generally spread by sexual transmission from the genital reservoir of infection. The primary source of infection is a benign subclinical venereal disease producing a mild urethritis in the male and cervicitis in the female.The modes of transmission are orogenital activities and hand to eye spread of infective genital secretions. A common mode of transmission is through the water in swimming pools; thus the disease may occur in local epidemics (swimming pool conjunctivitis). It is also transmitted from the mother to the newborn.Treatment- azithromycin or doxycycline

Question: Treatment for dendritic ulcer includes all except: March 2009
A. Penetrating keratoplasty
B. Acyclovir
C. Steroids
D. Debridement of the edges of the ulcer
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. C: Steroids Debridement of the edges of the ulcer with a moistened, fine cotton tipped applicators helps in reducing the load of active virus-infected cells. The standard treatment is idoxuridine drops/ trifluridine drops/ acyclovir 3% eye ointment/ 3% vidarabine ointment produces a resolution of herpes in 95% of the patients. Steroids are contraindicated in suspected cases of herpes simplex epithelial keratitis paicularly in the presence of active viral replication. Penetrating keratoplasty is useful in cases with herpetic scarring where the eye has been free of activity for a year.

Question: Which of the following condition is associated with limitation of both adduction and abduction of the affected eye?
A. Duane retraction syndrome Type 1
B. Duane retraction syndrome Type 2
C. Duane retraction syndrome Type 3
D. Double elevator palsy
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Weakness of both adduction and abduction of the eye is a feature of Duane retraction syndrome type 3. Duane retraction syndrome is a congenital, incomitant ocular motility disorder characterized by abnormal function of lateral rectus muscle in the affected eye together with retraction of the globe and narrowing of the palpabrel fissure on attempted adduction. Retraction of the globe and narrowing of the palpabrel fissure occur due to simultaneous contraction of medial and lateral rectus muscles on attempted adduction. There are of 3 types: DRS type 1 - limited abduction, normal adduction DRS type 2 - limited adduction, normal abduction DRS type 3 - limited adduction and abduction

