Question: All are True about Acute Osteomyelitis except
A. Common in children
B. Severe pain
C. Involves Epiphyseal plate
D. Treatment involves 6 weeks of Antibiotics
Correct Answer: C

Question: Anterolateral ahroscopy of knee is for:
A. To see patellofemoral aiculation
B. To see the posterior cruciate ligament
C. To see the anterior poion of lateral meniscus
D. To see the periphery of the posterior horn of medial meniscus
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Standard poals in knee ahroscopy Anterolateral poal Almost all the structures within the knee joint can be seen except- posterior cruciate ligament anterior poion of the lateral meniscus periphery of the posterior horn of the medial meniscus in tight knees. Anteromedial poal Additional viewing of lateral compament Posteromedial poal Used for viewing the posteromedial structures For repair or removal of the displaced posterior horn of meniscal tears Superolateral poal Used for diagnostically viewing the dynamics of patella-femoral joint, excision of medial plica.

Question: What change will be seen in vertebral column in ochronosis-
A. Calcification of disc
B. Bamboo spine
C. Increased disc space
D. None
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. is 'a' i.e., Calcification of discAlkaptonuria# It is due to deficiency of homogentisate oxidase. As a result homogentisic acid (homogentisate) is excreted execessively in urine, There are three important characteristic features in alkaptonuria-Urine becomes dark after being exposed to air. It is due spontaneous oxidation of homogentisate into benzoquinone acetate, which polvmerse to form black-brown pigment alkapton which imparts a characteristic black-brown colour to urine.Alkapton deposition occurs in sclera, ear, nose, cheeks and intervertebral disc space. A condition called ochronosis. There may be calcification of intervertebral discs.Onchronosis arthritis affecting shoulder, hips, knee.# Benedict's test is strongly positive in urine and so is the ferric chloride (FeClyl test. Benedict's reagent gives a greenish brown precipitate with brownish black supematent. Feh ling's reagent (FeClj gives blue green colour.

Question: Position of limb in posterior dislocation of hip -
A. Flexion, abduction & external rotation
B. Flexion, adduction & internal rotation
C. Flexion, adduction & external rotation
D. Flexion, abduction & internal rotation
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. is 'b' i.e., Flexion, adduction & internal rotation Hip conditionDeformitySynovitisArthritisPosterior dislocationAnterior dislocationFemoral neck fractureIntertrochantric fractureFlexion, abduction, external rotation, apparent lengtheningFlexion, adduction, internal rotation, true shorteningFlexion, adduction, internal rotation, apparent & true shorteningFlexion, abduction, external rotation, true lengtheningExternal rotation, later adduction & flexionMarked external rotation, later adduction & flexion

Question: Increase in pauwel's angle indicate
A. Good prognosis
B. Impaction
C. More chances of displacement
D. Trabecular alignment displacement
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Pauwel's classification - depending on angle (Pauwel's angle) formed by the line with the horizontal. More the Pauwell's angle, more unstable is the fracture with poorer prognosis Type I : <30deg Type II : 30-50deg Type III: >50deg(worst prognosis)

Question: Ortolani's test is done for
A. Congenial dislocation of the knee joints
B. Congenital dislocation of the hip joints
C. Congenital dislocation of the shoulder joints
D. Congenital dislocation of the elbow joints
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: B. i.e. (Congenital dislocation of hip joints) (410 - Apley 8th)Important Tests**Ortolani's and Barlow's test Galeazzi test (604 CDT 4th)Congenital dislocation of hip joints** Apprehension testRecurrent dislocation of shoulder joints* Bryant's Call ways Hamilton ruler testHamilton ruler testAnterior dislocation of shoulder joints* **Pivot-shift testAnterior cruciate ligament* Lachman testAnterior cruciate ligament* Drawer testCruciate ligament (Ant & Post)* **Mc-Murray's testMeniscus injury* Appley's grinding testMeniscus injury* **Thomas testHip flexion deformity* ** Ankle joint has LEAST chances for recurrent dislocations

Question: index finger infection spreads to -
A. Thenar space
B. Mid palmar space
C. Hypothenar space
D. Flexion space
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. is 'a' i.e., Thenar space o Thenar space communicates w'ith the index finger while the mid palmar space communicates with the middle, ring and little fingers.o Thus infection of index finger leads to thenar space infection while the infection of middle, ring or little finger leads to mid palmar space infection.FeaturesMidpalmar spaceThenar space1. ShapeTriangular.Triangular2. SituationUnder the inner half of the hollow of the palm.Under the outer half of the hollow of the3. ExtentProximalDistalDistal margin of the flexor retinaculum.Distal palmar crease.Distal margin of the flexor retinaculum.Proximal transverse palmar crease.4, CommunicationsProximalDistalForearm space.Fascial sheaths of the 3rd and 4th lumbricals; occasionally 2nd.Fascial sheath of th first lumbrical, occasionally 2nd.5. BoundariesAnteriorPosteriori) Flexor tendons of 3rd, 4th. and 5th fingersii) 2nd, 3rd and 4th lumbricalsiii) Palmar aponeurosisFascia covering interossei and metacarpals.Intermediate palmar septumi) Short muscles of thumb.ii) Flexor tendons of the index finger.iii) First Lumbricalsiv) Palmar aponeurosis.Transverse head of adductor pollicis.Laterali) Tendon of flexor pollicis longus with radial bursa.ii) Lateral palmar septum.Intermediate palmar septum.MedialMedial palmar septum6. DrainageIncision in either the 3rd or 4th web space.Incision in the first web. posteriorly.

Question: Sacro-Iliac joint involvement is common in which condition?
A. Ankylosing spondylitis
B. Rheumatoid arthritis
C. Reiter's syndrome
D. Osteoarthritis
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: (A) Ankylosing spondylitis # ANKYLOSING SPONDYLITIS (AS, from Greek ankylos, crooked; spondylos, vertebrae; -itis, inflammation), previously known as Bekhterev's disease, Bekhterev syndrome, and Marie-Strumpell disease, is a chronic inflammatory disease of the axial skeleton with variable involvement of peripheral joints and nonarticular structures. AS is a form of spondyloarthritis, a chronic, inflammatory arthritis where immune mechanisms are thought to have a key role. It mainly affects joints in the spine and the sacroiliac joint in the pelvis, and can cause eventual fusion of the spine.> The typical patient is a young male, aged 20-40; however, the condition also presents in females.> The condition is known to be hereditary. Symptoms of the disease first appear, on average, at age 23 years. These first symptoms are typically chronic pain and stiffness in the middle part of the spine or sometimes the entire spine, often with pain referred to one or other buttock or the back of thigh from the sacroiliac joint.

Question: Which one of the following is a malignant bone tumour?
A. Osteoid osteoma
B. Chondroma
C. Chondrosarcoma
D. Osteochondroma
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: (C) Chondrosarcoma # MALIGNANT PRIMARY BONE TUMORS include osteosarcoma, chondrosarcoma, Ewing's sarcoma, malignant fibrous histiocytoma, fibrosarcoma, and other sarcoma types. Multiple myeloma is a hematologic cancer which also frequently presents as one or more bone tumors.# CLASSIFICATION of BONE TUMOURS:> Cartilage tumors Osteochondroma: Chondromas Enchondroma Periosteal chondroma Chondroblastoma Chondromyxoid fibroma Chondrosarcoma Dedifferentiated Mesenchymal Clear cell Periosteal> Osteogenic tumors: Osteoid osteoma (B), Osteoblastoma> Fibrogenic tumors: Desmoplastic fibroma of bone, Fibrosarcoma of bone> Fibrohistiocytic tumors: Histiocytoma of bone> Ewing sarcoma/Primitive neuroectodermal tumor> Giant cell tumors: Giant cell tumor> Notochordal tumors: Chordoma> Vascular tumors: Haemangioma and related lesions, Angiosarcoma> Myogenic, lipogenic, neural and epithelial tumors: Leiomyosarcoma of bone, Lipoma of bone, Adamantinoma and osteofibrous dysplasia> Tumors of undefined neoplastic nature: Aneurysmal bone cyst Simple bone cyst; Fibrous dysplasia (B); Langerhans cell histiocytosis (LCH)

Question: Lift off test is used for which of the following muscles?
A. Supraspinatus
B. Subscapularis
C. Infraspinatus
D. Biceps Breachii
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. is 'b' i.e., Subscapularis TestMuscle TestedLift off testSubscapularisJobe testSupraspinatusSpeed testBicepsYergason testBicepsBelly press testSubscapularis

Question: Generally, radiotherapy should not be used for treating benign conditions. The only possible exception being:
A. Chondromyxoid fibroma
B. Extensive pigmented villonodular synovitis
C. Benign fibrous histiocytoma
D. Desmoplastic fibroma so extensive that it cannot be surgically excise
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. B. Extensive pigmented villonodular synovitisPVNS is commonly seen around knee. Synovial inflammation occurs due to cholesterol and pigment deposition. Radiotherapy may alleviate this disease. Else one has to go with synovectomy. Malignant transformation is reported but very rare.SYNOVIAL SARCOMA is a soft tissue tumor that does not have synovial origin despite its name. It is a rare but aggressive tumor that arises from tendon sheaths or joint capsules where there are multipotent stem cell rests that differentiate into mesenchymal as well as epithelial structures, hence a BIPHASIC TUMOR. It is characterized by Ctrl (X;18). Excision is the treatment of choice.

Question: Bakers cyst is a type of:
A. Pulsion diveiculum of knee joint
B. Retention cyst
C. Bursitis
D. Benign tumor
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Baker's cyst:- It is a pulsion diveiculum of knee joint.- It usually found in the posterior aspect of the knee joint.- It is associated with medial meniscal injury.

Question: Pott's spine is commonest at which spine:
A. Thoracolumbar
B. Sacral
C. Cervical
D. Lumbosacral
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: ANSWER: (A) ThoracolumbarREF: Apley 387-389, S M Tuli 3rd edition page 192Most common site of skeletal tuberculosis is spine followed by hip and knee SPINE (50%) > HIP > KNEECommonest spine involved in spine TB is Thoracolumbar/Dorsolumbar T12-L1 (Lower thoracic to be precise)LOWER THORACIC > LUMBAR > UPPER THORACICParaplegia due to pott s spine most commonly involves upper thoracic vertebrae as in upper thoracic vertebrae there is more acute kyphosis, spinal canal is narrow and spinal cord is relatively large.First symptom of TB spine is "Pain on movement"Commonest symptom of TB spine is "Back pain"

Question: All are true about Klumpke's paralysis except
A. Claw hand is never seen
B. Intrincsic muscles of hand are paralysed
C. Horner's syndrome can be associated
D. Involves lower trunk of brachial plexus
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Klumpke's paralysis

C8 and T1 roots involved.
Intrinsic muscles of hand paralysed.
Wrist and finger flexous are weak.
Unilateral Horner's syndrome.
Claw hand is seen.

Question: Which soft tissue sarcoma commonly gives to bone secondaries: (PGI June 2008)
A. Fibrosarcoma
B. Liposarcoma
C. Osteosarcoma
D. Neurofibroma
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. C (Osteosarcoma) "Any cancer can spread to bone ,but in adults more than 75% of skeletal metastases originate from cancers of the prostate,breast,kidney & lung. In children, metastases to bone originate from Neuroblastoma, Wilm's tumor, Osteosarcoma, Ewing sarcoma & Rhabdomyosarcoma"- Robbins7th/1303Sarcoma Metastasizing through lymhatics (causing L.N involvement) LymhosarcomaQ RhabdomyosarcomaQ AngiosarcomaQ Clear cell sarcomaQ Epithelial sarcoma M aligna nt fibrous histiocytomaQ Synovial cell sarcomaQ

Question: Thomas splint most troubling is:
A. Ring
B. Side bars
C. Gauze support
D. Traction attachment
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: (a) Ringbecause it impinges against proximal thigh.

Question: A 6-year-old child has an accident and had elbow, after 4 years presented with tingling and numbness in the ulnar side of finger, fracture is
A. supra condylar humerus
B. lateral condylar humerus
C. olecranon
D. dislocation of elbow
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. is 'b' i.e.lateral condyle humerus This child had lateral condyle of humerus 4 yrs back. He is now presenting with symptoms of tardy ulnar palsy. Lateral condyle of humerus may lead to cubitus valgus deformity because of diminished growth at the lateral side of distal humeral epiphyses. Cubitus valgus deformity leads to late ulnar palsy (tardy ulnar nerve palsy) because of friction neuritis of the ulnar nerve as it moves over the medial epicondyle every time the elbow is flexed and extended. Ulnar nerve palsy presents as tingling and numbness in the distribution of ulnar nerve.Treatment- Anterior transposition of ulnar nerve.

Question: Subtrochanteric fractures of the femur can be treated by all of the following methods except
A. Skeletal traction on Thomas' splint
B. Smith Petersen Nail
C. Condylar blade plate
D. Ender's nail
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Smith Peterson Nail is a cannulated tri-flanged nail that was used for internal fixation of fracture neck of femur Results obtained by S-P nail were dissatisfactory and it is no more recommended for use these days.
Other three options are used for the treatment of the subtrochanteric fracture.

Question: Swan neck deformity -
A. Flexion at PIP and DIP joint
B. Extention at PIP and DIP joint
C. Flexion at PIP and Extention at DIP joint
D. Extention at PIP and Flexion at DIP joint
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ans. is 'd' i.e., Extention at PIP and Flexion at DIP joint * Boutonniere deformity: Flexion contracture of PIP joint and extension of DIP joint.* Swan neck deformity: Hyperextension of PIP joint and flexion at DIP joint.

Question: Which of the following nerves has the best prognosis for repair after injury -
A. Ulnar
B. Radial
C. Median
D. Lateral popliteal
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. is 'b' i.e., Radial nerveRecovery potential after nerve repairExcellent :- Radial, Musculocutaneous, femoral, digital nervesModerate :- Median, Ulnar, TibialPoor :- Common peroneal (lateral popliteal)

Question: Epiphyseal enlargement occurs in -
A. Paget's disease
B. Sheurmann's disease
C. Epiphyseal dysplasia
D. Hemophilia
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Epiphyseal enlargement

Most common causes of epiphyseal enlargement are chronic inflammation (e.g. JRA) or chronic increase in blood flow. Causes of Epiphyseal enlargement are:-

a) Solitary (Enlargement of particular epiphysis)

Post-inflammatory (JRA, Septic arthritis)
Perthe's disease (in repair stage)
Status post hip dislocation
Hemophilia (Hemophilic arthropathy)
Turner syndrome
Klippel-trenaunay syndrome (angiohypertrophy syndrome)
Kascibach - Merritt syndrome
Beckwith - Wiedemann syndrome (Hemihypertrophy)
Trevor disease (Dysplasia epiphysealis hemimelica)

b) Generalized

Hyperthyroidism   
Acromegaly or cerebral gigantism         
Adrenogenital syndrome   iv) Rickets
Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia
McCune-Albright syndrome
Kniest syndrome

Question: The commonest cause of limp in a child of seven years is -
A. T.B. hip
B. C.D.H
C. Perthe's disease
D. Slipped upper femoral epiphysis
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: The most common cause of limp in a child between 3-10 years is transient synovitis of hip.
However, among the given options Perthe's disease is the best answer as Perthes disease is the second most common cause of limp in a child between 5-10 years.

Question: Pulled elbow means -
A. Fracture of head of radius
B. Subluxation of head of radius
C. Fracture dislocation of elbow
D. Fracture ulna
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. is 'b' i.e., Subluxation of head of radius Pulled elbowo If a young child is lifted by the wrist, the head of the radius may be pulled partly out of the annular ligament, i.e., subluxation of the head of the radius.o Ir occurs when forearm is pronated, elbow is extended and longitudinal traction is applied to the hand or wrist, e.g., lifting, spinning or swinging a child with wrist or hand. Pulled elbow most commonly occurs between the age of 2-5 years.Clinical features of pulled elbowo History of sudden axial pull on extended elbow.o Immediately child starts crying and is unable to move the affected elbow.o The forearm is held in pronation and extension and any attempt to supinate is resisted,o Child does not allow to touch the affected limb,o X-ray seems to be normal.Treatment of pulled elbowo Treatment is simple. The child's attention is diverted, the elbow is quickly supinated and then slightly flexed.o This reduces the subluxation or dislocation and the radial head is relocated with a snap.

Question: Treatment of Non-union of # shaft femur -
A. Open reduction with external fixation
B. Excision of the bone
C. Bone grafting with internal fixation with K-Nail
D. All of the following
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Treatment of choice is open the fracture site for bone grafting and internal fixation.
Internal fixation technique may be : -
Intramedullary interlock nailing (Preferred)


Intramedullary 'K' nailing
Plating (compression plaiting).

Question: Rickets in infant present as all except -
A. Cranitabes
B. Widened Fontanel
C. Rachitic Rosary
D. Bow legs
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Long bones of legs gets deformed when the child starts bearing weight. Therefore deformities of legs are unusual before the age of one year.

Question: A 40-year-old intravenous drug user presents to the emergency depament with a 2 days history of right knee pain with associated swelling and erythema. The patient is febrile with a holosystolic murmur at the right lower sternal border. Complete blood count reveals leukocytosis. Blood and synol fluid cultures are sent, and broad-spectrum antibiotics are staed. Synol fluid analysis is pending. What is the most likely pathogen causing these symptoms
A. Neisseria gonorrhoeae
B. Pseudomonas aeruginosa
C. Borrelia burgdorferi
D. Staphylococcus aureus
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Gram-positive bacteria remain the most common cause of septic ahritis. Staphylococcus aureus accounts for the majority of culture-positive septic ahritis, especially within ceain patient subgroups such as hemodialysis patients and intravenous drug abusers. The predominance of S. aureus in septic ahritis has remained unchanged for many years.

Question: Which of the following is/are sign of fracture ?
A. Abnormal mobility
B. Crepitus
C. Failure to transmit movement proximally
D. All of above
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Sure signs of fracture :- 1 Abnormal mobility(best) 2 Failure to transmit movements proximally 3 Crepitus 4 Tenderness(Commonest sign)

Question: "Lift off' and "Belly Press" tests are done to examine which of the following rotator cuff muscle?
A. Teres Minor
B. Supraspinatus
C. Subscapularis
D. Infraspinatus
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. C. SubscapularisSubscapularis muscle is responsible for extremes of internal rotation, which can be tested with belly press and lift off test.

Question: A 64 year old hypertensive obsese female was undergoing surgery for fracture femur under general anaesthesia. Intra-operatively her end-tidal carbon dioxide decreased to 20 from 40 mm of Hg, followed by hypotension and oxygen saturation of 85%. What could be the most probable cause?
A. Fat embolism
B. Hypovolemia
C. Bronchospasm
D. Myocardial infarction
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: "Arterial blood gas analysis reveals hypoxemia and hypocapnia, with subsequent metabolic acidosis in severe pulmonary embolism. During anaesthesia, end tidal CO2 concentration may fall dramatically because of increased dead space and reduced cardiac output". _________ Anesthesia & Intensive care

Note : Fat embolism can present as pulmonary embolism when an extensive fat embolism of lung is present.

Question: Test for tight iliotibial band is
A. Ober's test
B. Osber's test
C. Simmond's test
D. Charnley's test
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: OBER&;S TEST:Used in physical examination to identify tightness of iliotibial band. During the test ,the patient lies on his side with the unaffected leg on the bottom with their shoulder and pelvis in line. The knee may extended or flexed to 90 or 30 degrees.The hip is maintained in slight extension.The test leg is abducted,then allowed to lower toward the table with the pelvis stabilized NORMAL: able to abduct parallel to the examining surface Inability to adduct to parallel indicates tightness of iliotibial band REF : MAHESWARI 9TH ED

Question: Non-Inflammatory arthritis is
A. Rheumatoid arthritis
B. Reiter's syndrome
C. Gonococcal arthritis
D. Osteo-arthritis
Correct Answer: D

Question: Most common bone fracture in body is:
A. Radius
B. Clavicle
C. Femur
D. Vertebra
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans: b (Clavicle)Ref: Maheshwari Ortho, 3rd ed, p. 73

Question: True about proximal fragment In supratrochantric fracture is
A. Flexion
B. Abduction
C. External rotation
D. All of the the above
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: The peritrochanteric fracture is one of the most serious causes of mortality and morbidity in the elderly.
Subtrochanteric fractures account for approximately 10-30% of all peritrochanteric fractures, and they affect persons of all ages.
1,2 The subtrochanteric region of the femur is generally recognized to be the area of the femur below the inferior border of the lesser trochanter, extending distally 7.5 cm to the junction of the proximal and middle third of the femur.3 Most frequently, these fractures are seen in two patient populations, namely older osteopenic patients after a low-energy fall and younger patients involved in high-energy trauma.1-3 In elderly patients, minor slips or falls that lead to direct lateral hip trauma are the most frequent mechanism of injury.
This age group is also susceptible to metastatic disease that can lead to pathologic fractures.
In younger patients, the mechanism of injury is always high-energy trauma, either direct or from axial loading (e.g., a fall from height), which often creates a comminuted fracture.

Question: Terry Thomas sign is seen in
A. Keinbock's disease
B. Carpal dislocation
C. Calcaneal disorder
D. Hip trauma
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: scapholunate dislocation : * Most common ligamentous instability of the wrist * Patients may have high degree of pain despite apparently normal radiographs * Physicians should suspect this injury if patient has wrist effusion and pain seemingly out of propoion to the injury * If improperly diagnosed can lead to chronic pain * Located proximal axial line from 3rd metacarpal Scapholunate Dissociation-Diagnosis * Exam -- Watson&;s test -- Scaphoid shuck test -- Pain/swelling over dorsal wrist, proximal row * Imaging -- Plain films: >3mm difference on clenched fist view -- Scaphoid ring sign Scapholunate Dissociation Treatment * If discovered within 4 weeks, surgery * After 4 weeks, conservative treatment reas -- Bracing -- NSAIDS -- Consider evaluation by hand surgery to confirm no surgery needed ref : maheswari 9th ed

Question: Which of the following is true about pathophysiology of skeletal fluorosis?
A. Fluorine increases PTH levels by direct action
B. Fluoroappatite crystals are resistant to osteoclasts
C. Fluorine decreases vitamin D levels
D. Fluorine erodes bone, thereby decreasing bone density
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Fluorosis: Excessive deposition of fluorine occurs in bone and soft tissues. Fluorine stimulates osteoblastic activityand fluoroappatite crystals are laid down in bone which are resistant to osteoclastic resorption. This leads to calcium retention, impaired mineralization and secondary hyperparathyroidism. Interosseousmembrane ossification is a diagnostic radiological finding in skeletal fluorosis The characteristic pathology involves Sub-periosteal new bone formation, Osteosclerosis(Most commonly seen veebrae, ribs and pelvis) Hyperostosis at the bony attachments of ligaments, tendons and fascia.

Question: All the following are true of Paget disease Except
A. It affects elderly individuals
B. It may be monostotic or polyostotic
C. There is an imbalance between osteoblastic and osteoclastic activity
D. Deformed long bones result from coical bone thinning
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Paget disease is a disorder of unknown origin, which occurs in older people and involves either a single bone or several bones. It is not associated with systemic metabolic disturbances, and some pas of the skeleton are always spared. The bones show marked thickening, owing to excessive osteoblastic and reduced osteoclastic activity. Although only a few persons suffering from Paget disease develop sarcoma of bone, in adults the disease remains an impoant predisposing condition for this tumor in long bones. The skull and veebrae are viually never the sites of secondary osteogenic sarcomas. Ref: Maheshwari 6e pg 317.

Question: Initial stage of clinical union of bone is equivalent to
A. Callus formation with woven bone
B. Woven bone Formation
C. Haematoma formation
D. Calcification formation only
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: The first signs of union are seen in stage of hard callus formation A. Clinical sign:fracture is no more mobile B. Radilogical sign :callus is seen on X ray *hard callus is immature woven bone* Ref: Maheshwari 9th/e p 12

Question: Dinner fork deformity is seen in -
A. Colies fracture
B. Supracondylar fracture of Humerus
C. Smith's fracture
D. Volar Barton Fracture
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. is 'a' i.e., Colles fracture DeformityAssociated fracture / conditionGarden Spade DeformitySmiths FractureGun stock deformityCubitus varus commonly due supracondylar humerus fractureDinner fork deformityColles FractureGenu VarumBlounts disease

Question: Painless effusion in congenital syphilis is called
A. Clutton joints
B. Baon joints
C. Chanrcot joinst
D. None of the above
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Skeletal manifestations of congenital syphilis Clutton's joints - Painless sterile effusions in the knees or elbows Parrot's joints - Effusion with epiphysitis and epiphyseal separation Erosion of the nasal boneThickening and expansion of the finger phalanges (dactylitis) Higoumenaki's sign - Bilateral enlargement of sternal end of the clavicle Saber tibia, Scaphoid scapula (Refer: Mohindra's Fundamentals of Ohopedics, 2nd edition, pg no. 291)

Question: All are true regarding brachial plexus injury, except:
A. Preganglionic lesions have a better prognosis than postganglionic lesions
B. Erb's palsy causes paralysis of the abductors and external rotators of the shoulder
C. In Klumpke's palsy, Horner's syndrome may be present on the ipsilateral side
D. Histamine test is useful to differentiate between the preganglionic and postganglionic lesions
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Preganglionic lesions have a poor prognosis as these do not recover and are surgically irreparable. Postganglionic lesions have better prognosis than preganglionic lesions and histamine test is useful in making the distinction

Question: Fracture of necessity is used to describe -
A. Cottons fracture
B. Galeazzi fracture
C. Monteggia fracture
D. Rolando fracture
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. is 'b' i.e., Galleazzi fracture * "Closed reduction is usually not successful due to the deforming forces of the muscles. Hence, open reduction and internal fixation is the preferred method of treatment. Campbell noted this in 1941 and termed Galeazzi fracture as "Fracture of necessity".

Question: Metal on Metal articulation should be avoided in -
A. Osteonecrosis
B. Young female
C. Inflammatory arthritis
D. Revision surgery
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Based on the articulating surfaces of the prosthesis, THR may be of the following type:-


Metal on poly: One surface is metallic (femoral side) and the other is of polyethene (on the acetabular side).
Metal on metal: Both articulating surfaces are of metal.
Ceramic on ceramic: Both articulating surfaces are of ceramic.

Contraindications to Metal on Metal Bearing surfaces
(Metal on Metal Total Hip Replacement or Metal on Metal Hip Resurfacing)

Patients with Renal Insufficiency (Chronic Renal failure) (Kidney are chiefly responsible for eliminating metal ions from the blood)
Young females of childbearing age (Women who may potentially still have children) (Elevated levels of metal ions have harmful effects on the fetus)
Patients with metal hypersensitivity

Contraindications to (Metal on Metal) Hip Resurfacing (Not contraindications to Metal on metal articulation)

Loss of femoral head (severe bone loss: poor bone stock)
Large femoral neck cysts (poor bone stock: found at surgery)
The small or bone deficient acetabulum

Conditions that require caution: Associated with increased risk of failure

Tall thin patients
Female patients
Patients with femoral head cysts > 1 cm (on preoperative radiographs)
Patients with high body mass index > 35
Rheumatoid arthritis (Inflammatory arthritis) and Osteonecrosis (AVIV)

Rheumatoid arthritis (Inflammatory arthritis) and osteonecrosis of the hip/ perthe's disease were earlier considered contraindications/ semi- contraindications for Resurfacing. These have now shown to have successful results.

Question: Cubitus varus deformity in supracondylar fracture of humerus is usually due to
A. Posterior displacement
B. Posterior angulation
C. Coronal tilt
D. All of the above
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. c (Coronal tilt) (Ref. Bailey & Love surgery, 24th/pg. 375; Orthopedics by John Ebnezar - Pg.155)Malunion (gunstock deformity/cubitus varus) can result from tilt in the coronal plane, and is the most common late complication of supracondylar fracture.SUPRACONDYLAR FRACTURE OF HUMERUS# There are two types of supracondylar fracture--the extension type (95%), in which the anterior cortex fails first with resultant posterior displacement of the distal fragment, and the flexion type, in which the opposite occurs.# Extension type supracondylar fractures are classified using Gartland's classification:- Type I fractures are nondisplaced,- Type II fractures are displaced but hinged on the posterior cortex, and- Type III fractures are completely displaced, as in this case (have potentially serious complications).Early Complications# Vascular damage- As the distal fragment and forearm are pushed backward, the brachial artery and median nerve are pulled violently against the sharp lower edge of the proximal fragment. Circulation must be assessed looking for pulselessness, pallor, pain, paresthesia, and paralysis (the five p's), and capillary refill.# Compartment syndrome# Nerve damage- The median, radial, and ulnar nerves may be injured, with potential long-term pain and functional deficit. Fortunately, the injury is usually a neuropraxia, which recovers with conservative treatment.# Myositis ossificansLate Complications# Volkmann's ischemic contracture# Malunion- Cubitus varus (gun stock deformity) is the most common long-term complication resulting from a malunion of a supracondylar fracture of the humerus in children.- The deformity occurs as a result of residual coronal angulation. Corrective supracondylar osteotomy is performed mainly to improve the cosmetic appearance and not for functional reasons. The most popular method was lateral closing wedge osteotomy but it needs detailed preoperative planning, careful surgical technique but can still cause recurrent varus and lateral condylar prominence in older children.- In Dome osteotomy vulnerability of the radial nerve is the problem. Osteotomy with T-plate fixation gives very good correction of varus deformity, with stable fixation and good functional result but care must be taken to avoid injury to the radial nerve.# Supracondylar fracture of humerus undergoes medial tilt and can lead to varus deformity.- It can cause tardy ulnar nerve palsy.Rx of Supracondylar Fracture:

Question: In an RTA, a patient sustained soft tissue and Brachial plexus injuries with nerve affected in weakness of extensors of entire arm, forearm, hand with shoulder flexion, and extension. This is suggestive of involvement of
A. Middle and lower cord
B. C5,6,7
C. C5 to T1
D. Posterior trunk
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: (C) C5 to T1 # Preganglionic lesions have a poor prognosis as these do not recover and are surgically irreparable.> Postganglionic lesions have better prognosis than preganglionic lesions and histamine test is useful in making the distinction> Postganglionic lesions: Disruption proximal to the dorsal root ganglion Avulsion of nerve root from the spinal cord Cannot Recover Surgically irreparable Histamine test is positive Pseudomeningoceles on CT myelography or MRI due to root avulsion may be seen (positive result is unreliable during first few days). Sensory conduction from anaesthetic dermatome on nerve conduction studies suggests a preganglionic lesion (i.e. nerve distal to ganglion is not interrupted)> Erb's palsy: Upper obstetric palsy C5-C6 roots are affected Abductors and external rotators of the shoulder are paralysed Arm is held to the side (adducted), internally rotated and pronated (Waiter's tip deformity)> Klumpke's palsy: Lower obstetric palsy C8-T1 roots are affected (Involvement of T1 root may cause a homer's syndrome due to sympathetic nerve disturbance) This is a complete plexus lesion and more severe. Arm is frail and pale. Generalized wasting of all intrinsic muscles and a claw hand deformity is seen. Unilateral (ipsilateral) Horner's syndrome is often associated.> Histamine test: Intradermal injection of histamine usually causes a triple response in the surrounding skin. Central capillary dilatation Wheel Surrounding flare> If the flare reaction persists in an anaesthetic area of skin, the lesion must be proximal to the posterior root ganglion i.e. it is probably a root avulsion.> Postganglionic lesions have better prognosis than preganglionic lesions and histamine test is useful in making the distinction.

Question: Inferior tibiofibular joint is which type of joint
A. Gomphosis
B. Condylar
C. Syndesmosis
D. Synchondrosis
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: syndesmosis is a fibrous joint between two bones and linked by ligaments and a strong membrane. The distal tibiofibular syndesmosis is asyndesmotic joint. Ref: Maheshwari 6e pg 159,162,163.

Question: Absence of lamina dura in the alveolus occurs in:
A. Rickets
B. Osteomalacia
C. Deficiency of vitamin C
D. Hyperparathyroidism
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Radiological Features of Hyperparathyroidism Subperiosteal resorption of terminal tufts of phalanges, lateral end of clavicle and symphysis pubis. Loss of lamina dura (i.e. thin coical bone of tooth socket surrounding teeth is seen as thin white line, is resorbed). Fig : Loss of Lamina Dura Brown Tumor Salt and Pepper appearance of skull Treatment: Direct parenteral supplementation of calcium. -Dental findings of other options : Osteomalacia- no tooth abnormality as such Rickets- enamel defect Deficiency of vitamin C- bleeding gums + dentine defects

Question: Monteggia fracture is -
A. Fracture of the proximal ulna with radial head dislocation
B. Radial head subluxation
C. Tear in interosseus membrane between radius and ulna with proximal ulna fracture
D. Distal radius Fracture with injury to Distal radio ulnarjoint
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. is 'a' i.e., Fracture of the proximal ulna with radial head dislocation Eponymous injuries of forearmNameInjuryMonteggia fracture dislocationFracture of upper third of ulna with dislocation of the radial headGalleazi fractureFracture of distal third of radius with dislocation or subluxation of inferior (distal) radio-ulnar jointEssex Lopresti lesionFracture of the radial head with distal radioulnar joint injury with tear in the interosseus membrane

Question: Nutrient and oxygen reach the chondrocytes across perichondrium by
A. Capillaries
B. Diffusion
C. Along neurons
D. Active transpo
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: an impoant fact about cailage matrix is that it is avascular, i.e. not supplied by capillariestherefore, chondrocytes within the matrix must receive nutrients and oxygen by diffusion from vessels that lie outside the cailagethis long-distance diffusion is possible because of the large volume of water trapped within the matrix(Refer: Manish Kumar Varshney's Essential Ohopedics Principles & Practice, 1st edition, pg no. 7, 347)

Question: Oblique view in XRAY of hand is required for diagnosis of
A. Capitate
B. Scaphoid
C. Navicular
D. Hamate
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Oblique view of the wrist is required for scaphoid fracture * Most common fractured bone in the wrist * Peanut shaped bone that spans both row of carpal bones * Does not require excessive force and often not extremely painful so can be delayed presentation * Pain over the anatomic snuff box * Pain is not usually severe * Often present late Scaphoid Fracture Treatment * Cast 6-12 weeks * Sho arm vs. long arm * Follow patient every 2 weeks with x-ray * CT and clinical evaluation to determine healing * Consider screwing early Ref: Maheshwari and Mhaskar 9th ed pg 367.

Question: What is true about Salter-Harris type IV epiphyseal injury:
A. Fracture occur through growth plate only
B. Fracture occur through growth plate & metaphy- sis only
C. Fracture occur through growth plate, metaphysic & epiphysis
D. Fracture occur through epiphysis only
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans: C (Fracture occur through growth plate, metaphysic & epiphysis) SALTER~HARRIS FRACTURES http://wwwlbpt.bridgeport.edu/-gwl/salter-barrisdassification.htmThere are nine types of Salter-Harris fractures; types 1 to V as described by Robert B Salter and W Robert Harris in 1963, and the rarer types V! to IX which have been added subsequently:Type I - A transverse fracture through the growth plate (also referred to as the "physis"): 6% incidenceType II - A fracture through the growth plate and the metaphysis, sparing the epiphysis: 75% incidence, takes approximately 2-3 weeks to heal.Type III - A fracture through growth plate and epiphysis, sparing the metaphysis: 8% incidenceType IV - A fracture tb rough all three elements of the bone, tbegrowth plate, metaphysis, and epiphysis: 10% incidenceType V - A compression fracture of the growth plate (resulting in a decrease in the perceived space between theepiphysis and diaphysis on x-ray): 1% incidenceType VI -Injury to the peripheral portion of the physisand a resultant bony bridge formation which may produce an angular deformity (added in 1969 by Mercer Rang)Type VII - Isolated injury of the epiphyseal plate (VII--IX added in 1982 by JA Ogden)Type VIII - Isolated injury of the metaphysis with possible impairment of endochondral ossificationType IX - Injury of the periosteum which may impair intramem bra nous ossificationThe mnemonic "SALTR" can be used to help remember the first five types: This mnemonic requires the reader to imagine the bones as long bones, with the epiphyses at the base,I - S = Slip (separated or straight across), Fracture of the cartilage of the physis (growth plate)II - A = Above. The fracture lies above the physis, or Away from the joint.III - L = Lower. The fracture is below the physis in the epiphysis.IV - TE = Through Everything. The fracture is through the metaphysis, physis, and epiphysis.V - R = Rammed (crushed). The physis has been crushed, (alternatively SALTER can be used for the first 6 types - as above but adding Type Vr 'E' for Everything or Epiphysis and Type VI'R' for Ring)Fig: Types of Salter-Harris fractures

Question: Osteosclerotic metastasis is common in cancer of:
A. Prostate
B. Lungs
C. Malignant melanoma
D. Renal cell carcinoma
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. A. Prostate cancerProstate cancer leads to osteosclerotic metastasis because of release of PTH like proteinsa. Prostate carcinoma cells secrete factors that directly and indirectly alter the osteoblastic function and express factors critical for normal bone development and remodeling, including bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs), TGF-b, platelet- derived growth factor, adrenomedullin, insulin-like growth factor (IGF-1), fibroblast growth factor and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF).b. The osteolytic factor, PTHrP, is also abundantly expressed in Prostate carcinoma metastases, despite the fact that these lesions are primarily blastic. It has been demonstrated that PTHrP increases osteoblastic progenitor cell proliferation and induces early Osteoblastic differentiation.c. Another study says that Wants (a large family of proteins that promote bone growth) contribute to prostate cancer- mediated osteoblastic activity. Prostate cancer bone metastases have both an osteolytic and osteoblastic component, there is a shift in the balance from osteolytic to osteoblastic activity as prostate cancer progresses, which results in osteosclerotic (Osteoblastic) metastasis.

Question: All of the followings are true about Sprengel's deformity, except:
A. Associated with congental scoliosis
B. Associated with diastematomyelia
C. High incidence with Klippel-Feil syndrome
D. Associated with dextrocardia
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: ANS. DSprengel's deformity: It is congenital elevation of the scapula.Is a complex deformity of the shoulder and the most common congenital shoulder anomaly.Associations of Sprengel's deformity:* Klippel-Feil syndrome* Spina bifida* Diastematomyelia* Torticollis* Kyphoscoliosis# Klippel-Feil syndromeThe most common sign of the disorder is restricted mobility of the neck and upper spine. A short neck and low hairline at the back of the head may occur in some patients.

Question: Painful are syndrome is seen in all except -
A. Complete tear of supraspinatus
B. # greater tuberosity
C. Subacromial bursitis
D. Supraspinatus tendinitis
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Painful are syndrome is seen in incomplete tear of supraspinatus tendon (not in complete tear).

Question: The given below instrument is used for:
A. For cutting ribs in spinal surgery
B. For smoothening of the edges in amputation surgery
C. Used as nibbler and remove fibrous tissue from non-union site
D. To hold the hard tissues
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. (c) Used as nibbler and remove fibrous tissue from non-union siteRef: Textbook of Orthopedics 4th Ed by John Ebnezar; Page No- 861* It is a Double-action bone nibbler (Rounger). The double- action nibblers are mechanically superior.* Bone nibbler is available in various sizes and with different angle of the nose.# Curved nibbler - use for spinal surgery# Straight nibbler -general use# Double action nibbler - straight or curved.

Question: Most common site of disc prolapse in lumbar spine is
A. L2-3
B. L3-4
C. L4-5
D. L5-S1
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. is 'c' i.e., L4-5 Prolapsed intervertebral disc:* Herniation of intervertebral disc is a common cause of combined back pain and sciatica (Pain in back with radiation to lower limb). Prolapsed intervertebral disc is often precipitated by injury, but it may also occur in the absence of any remembered injury.* The site of exit of the nucleus is usually posterolateralon one or the other side.Occasionally, it can be central (posterior-midline)disc prolapse.* The type of nuclear protrusion maybe: a protrusion, an extrusion or a sequestration.* A dissecting extrusion, (an extrusion with discmaterial between the body of the vertebra andposterior longitudinal ligament, stripping the latteroff the body), may occur.* The commonest level of discprolapse is between L4-L5 in the lumbar spine and C5-C6 in the cervical spine.

Question: The following deformity is seen characteristically in
A. Osteoahiritis
B. Rheumatoid ahiritis
C. Ankylosing spondylitis
D. Psoriatric ahiritis
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Deformities of Rheumatoid ahritis Swan-neck deformity: flexion posture of the DIP and hyperextension posture of the PIP joints. Buttonhole or Boutonniere Deformity: PIP in flexion, DIP in hyperextension. Wind sweep deformity: hallux valgus on one side & hallux varus on another side- produce deformity which is parallel to each other. Intrinsic plus deformity: caused by tightness and contracture of the intrinsic muscles, seen in RA, Cerebral palsy etc. Here the IP joints are in extension & MCP joints are in flexion. Z deformity: Radial detion of the wrist joint with ulnar detion of MCP joints. Pannus may form in RA, with underlying cailage destruction. With time, synol fibrosis occurs, resulting in joint stiffness Ref : Maheshwari 6e pg 282.

Question: Damage to median nerv e produces -
A. Claw hand
B. Winging ofscapule
C. Ape thumb
D. Wrist drop
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. is 'c' i.e., Ape thumbDeformity' or disorderNerve involvedo Wrist dropo Radial nerveo Foot dropo Common peroneal nerve (Lateral popliteal)o Claw hand (complete)o Ulnar + Median nerveo Ulnar claw hando Ulnar nerveo Ape thumb deformityo Median nerveo Pointing indexo Median nerveo Policeman tip deformity'o Erb's Palsy (Brachial plexus)o Winging of scapulao Long thoracic nerve (nerve to SA)o Meralgia parestheticao Lateral cutaneous nerve of thigh

Question: There is spontaneous rupture of the Achilles tendon in an 18 year old male. It is most likely to be due to excess stress beyond -
A. Tendon strength
B. Bone strength
C. Muscle strength
D. Musculotendinous junction strength
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: ACHILLES TENDON RUPTURE: A ripping or popping sensation is felt, and often heard, at the back of the heel. This most commonly occurs in spos requiring an explosive push-off: squash, badminton, football, tennis, netball. The patient will often repo having looked round to see who had hit them over the back of the heel, the pain and collapse are so sudden.The typical site for rupture is at the vascular watershed about 4 cm above the tendon inseion onto the calcaneum. The condition is often associated with poor muscle strength and flexibility, failure to warm up and stretch before spo, previous injury or tendinitis and coicosteroid injection. REF:Apley&;s system of ohopaedics - 9th edn - pg no 615.

Question: Characteristic radiological feature of fibrous dysplasia-
A. Thickened bone matrix
B. Coical erosion
C. Ground glass appearance
D. Bone enlargement
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Fibrous Dysplasia (FD) Asymptomatic, self-limiting developmental regional alteration of bone in which the normal architecture is replaced by fibrous tissue and nonfunctional trabeculae-like osseous tissue. It is self-limiting (thus it is not a true neoplasm) * Represents a group of disorders with variety of clinical patterns * Mutation in GNAS 1 gene Clinical forms of fibrous dysplasia of the jaws * Monostotic: localized to a single bone Juvenile and aggressive juvenile Adult * Polystotic: involves several bones Craniofacial McCune-Albright syndrome Jaffe syndrome ref " maheswari 9th ed

Question: Tarsometatarsal amputation and Intertarsal amputation known as respectively,
A. Lisfranc and Pirogoff
B. Lisfranc and Chopart
C. Chopart and Lisfranc
D. Chopart and Pirogoff
Correct Answer: B

Question: What is the most probable diagnosis for on the x-ray of a 20 year old female who came with knee swelling
A. Osteosarcoma
B. Osteoclastoma
C. Osteochondroma
D. None of the above
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Sunburst appearance of Osteosarcoma Sunburst appearance is a type of periosteal reaction giving the appearance of a sunburst secondary to an aggressive The sunburst appearance occurs when the lesion grows too fast and the periosteum does not have enough time to lay down a new layer and instead the It is frequently associated with or osteoblastic metastases Ref: Maheshwari 6e pg 239.

Question: Dye is injected in one of the extremities in a child and is followed by pain and swelling of upper limb, paraesthesias of fingers, stretch pain and normal peripheral pulses, management is:
A. Aspiration
B. Anti-Inflammatory
C. Observation
D. Fasciotomy
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: (d) Fasciotomy- As patient is clinically a case of compartment syndrome -pain on passive stretch and he has paraesthesias so fasciotomy is indicated.- Remember Pulses can be normal in compartment syndrome.

Question: A child is spinned around by holding his hand by his father. While doing this the child started crying and does not allow his father to touch his elbow. The diagnosis is -
A. Pulled elbow
B. Radial head dislocation
C. Annular ligament tear
D. Fracture olecranon process
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: This is case of pulled elbow and a dramatic cure is achieved by forcefully supinating and then flexing the elbow.

Question: Anterolateral avulsion fracture of the distal tibial physis is known as -
A. Potts fracture
B. Tillaux frascture
C. Choparacture
D. Jones fractture
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Two unusual injuries of the growing ankle are the Tillaux fracture and the notorious triplane fracture. The TILLAUX fracture is an avulsion of a fragment of tibia by the anterior tibiofibular ligament; in the child or adolescent this fragment is the lateral pa of the epiphysis and the injury is therefore a Salter-Harris type 3 fracture. REF:Apley&;s system of ohopaedics- 9th edn - pg no 918 .

Question: Calcaneum is associated most commonly with which # -
A. # rib
B. # vertebrae
C. # skull
D. # fibula
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Most common mechanism of injury is fall from height, often from a ladder, onto one or both heels. The calcaneum is driven up against the talus and is split or crushed.
About one fifth of these patients suffer associated injuries of the spine, pelvis or hip.

Question: Open reduction is indicated in
A. clavicle
B. both bone forearm in children
C. lateral condyle humerus
D. supra condyle humerus
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. is 'c' i.e. lateral condyle humerus lateral condyle humerusis commonly displaced and is treated by OR & IF with K wires*Treatment of clavicle -Conservative figure of 8 bandage *Treatment of both bones fore arm in children -In children these fractures are often undisplaced or minimally displaced therefore managed conservatively - CR & immobilization in an above elbow plaster cast. forearm in adultsis often displaced so treatment by OR & IF.Treatment of supracondylar humerusMostly conservative - CR immobilization in an above elbow plaster slab with the elbow in hyperflexionon failure of conservative methods sometimes OR & IF with K wires is done.

Question: Carpal bone which fractures commonly:
A. Scaphoid
B. Lunate
C. Hamate
D. Pisiform
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans: a

Question: In actinomycosis of the spine, the abscess usually erodes:
A. Intervertebral disc
B. Into the pleural cavity
C. Into the retroperitoneal space
D. Towards the skin
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: (d)- Actinomycosis of spine is characterized by granulomatous lesions or osteomyelitis. Cutaneous sinus tracts frequently develop.

Question: A newborn child presents with inverted foot and the dorsum of the foot cannot touch the anterior tibia. The most probable diagnosis is:
A. Congenital vertical talus
B. Arthrogryposis Multiplex
C. CTEV
D. Cerebral palsy
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. c. CTEV (Ref: Apley's 9/e p291, 591-594; Turek's 6/e p658-661; Campbell's 11/e p1474-1475)The most probable diagnosis in a newborn child with inverted foot in whom the dorsum of the foot cannot touch the anterior tibia is CTEV.Congenital Talipes EquinoVarus (CTEV):Congenital deformity involving one foot or both.Affected foot appears rotated internally at the ankle.As heels are rotated internally patient is not able to touch tibia by dorsum of his foot.Congenital Vertical Talus (CVT):It is irreducible dorsal dislocation of the navicular on the talus with a fixed talo-navieular complex.CVT is a common cause of rigid flat foot, which can be isolated, or can occur with chromosomal abnormalities, myeloarthropathies (myelomeningocele) and neurologic disorders.Clinically talar head is prominent medially, sole is convex, forefoot is abducted and dorsiflexed, and the hind foot is equinovalgusSole of foot has a rocker-bottom (convex) deformityPatients demonstrate peg-leg gait (awkward gait with limited forefoot push off)Arthrogryposis Multiplex Congenita:Rare congenital disorder that is characterized by multiple joint contractures and can include muscle weakness and fibrosis.It is a non-progressive disease.The disease derives its name from Greek, literally meaning 'curved or hooked joints'.Cerebral Palsy:Includes the group of non-progressive, non-contagious motor conditions that cause physical disability in human development, chiefly in the various areas of body movement.Divided into four major classifications to describe different movement impairments; also reflect the areas of the brain that are damaged.The four major classifications are:Spastic: MC type (70-80%)Ataxic: Caused by damage to the cerebellum (10%)Athetoid/dyskinetic: Mixed muscle tone, trouble holding in an upright, steady position for sitting or walking; often show involuntary motions.Hypotonic: Patients have musculature that is limp, and can move only a little or not at all.Congenital Talipes EquinoVarus (CTEV)/Club FootCongenital deformity involving one foot or both.Affected foot appears rotated internally at the ankle.As heels are rotated internally patient is not able to touch tibia by dorsum of his foot.CTE-V is classified into 2 groups: Postural TEV and Structural TEV.Incidence: 1 in 1,000 live births: More common in malesEtiology and Associated Anomalies:Idiopathic (MC)Q; Secondary club footSecondary club foot* Neurological disorders and neural tube defectsQ (myelomeningocele and spinal dysraphism)* Paralytic disorder (due to muscular imbalance) as polio. spina bifidaQ, myelodysplasia, and Freidreich's ataxia* Arthrogryposis multiplexaQ* Larsen syndrome* Freeman-Sheldon (Mobius) syndrome* Diasirophic dwarfism* Sacral agenesis, tibial deficiency, constriction rings and amniotic bands* Fetal alcohol syndrome* Down's syndrome Deformities affecting joints of the foot in CTEV* Inversion at subtalar jointQ* Adduction at talonavicular jointQ* Equinus at ankle jointQ"InAdEquate" for Inversion, Adduction and EquinusQ.Screening Methods:The foot of a newborn child normally can be dorsiflexed until the dorsal surface of foot touches the anterior aspect of shin of tibiaQ.It is a useful screening method for detecting the milder cases of CTEV, in which the foot cannot touch anterior tibia.Clinical Presentation:Classical appearance of CTEV is small size foot and small heel with characteristic CAVE deformity (Cavus, Adduction, Varus, Equinus) i.e. heel in equinuis with foot inverted on end of tibia giving the foot an upside down club appearance.Inability to bring the foot in opposite directions to deformity.Deep skin creases on medial side of foot and back of heel.Outer side of foot is convex and contains bony prominences (e.g. head of talus) and dimples.Prognosis:Prognosis of non-idiopathic syndromic club foot is generally worse than that for an idiopathic club foot, although there are certain exceptions like Down's syndrome or Larsen's syndrome: in which because of significant ligamentous laxity underlying the syndrome itself, correction may be achieved with non-operative treatment.Management of CTEVConservative managementOperative management* Clubfoot always requires treatment, which should begin at birthQ.* Manipulation should be frequently repeated, and after manipulation some form of splint or cast must be usedQ.* In the first month of life, manipulation should be repeated 6 times at each nappy change and adhesive strapping which maintains the correctionQ.* In place of strapping, splintage (Dennis Brown Splint) and even casting usually at one-week interval in the first month of lifeQ can also be used.* In infants >1 month, corrective manipulations and above knee cast (from toe to groin) is applied for 2 weeks.* Delaying surgery is suitable for severe, rigid deformities; for less severe cases it may be preferable to operate at around 6 months of ageQ.* Posteromedial soft tissue release is best done at 6 months-3 yearsQ.* Triple arthrodesis is necessary for recurrent or persistent club foot deformity in older children (chronic cases)Q. It is best done at 10-12 years of age when foot growth is completeQ. Pseudoarthrosis (most commonly of talonavicular joint) is commonest complicationQ.Kite's MethodPonseti Method (Method of choice)6 months-3 yearsPosteromedial soft tissue releaseOrder of correction of deformity:* Adduction of forefoot* Inversion (varus) of heel / hind foot and inversion (supination) of fore /mid foot* Equinus (plantar flexion) of ankleOrder of correction of deformity:* Cavus* Adductus* Varus* Equinus4-10 yearsRevision of soft tissue release together with shortening of lateral side of foot by:* Lichtblau's Procedure (<6 years)* Even-Dillwyn Procedure (>6 years)>10-12 yearsTriple arthrodesisQ

Question: The most common site of primary osteoarthrosis is -
A. Hip joint
B. Knee joint
C. Ankle joint
D. Shoulder joint
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: In general, weight bearing lower limb joints are affected more commonly than upper limb joints.
However, No textbook has mentioned which is the commonest joint : knee or hip.
According to me it is knee because of following facts :-


I have seen hardly one or two cases of primary OA of hip; while, I have seen hundreds of cases of Primary OA of knee in my OPD. At least 4 to 5 patients of primary OA of knee comes daily to my OPD.
"OA commonly affects the knee joint"   —Ebnezar
"OA of hip is second in frequency to the knee joint" —Ebnezar

Question: Snowstorm appearance of knee joint with multiple loose bodies is seen in?
A. chondromalacia patellae
B. Ewings sarcoma of knee joint
C. Fracture involving articular surface
D. Synovial chondromatosis
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: ANSWER: (D) Synovial chondromatosisREF: The Journal of bone and joint surgery: British volume: Volume 71, Pages 549-912, http:// www.springerlink.com/content/17m54n357304205m/Snowstorm knee:Seen in Synovial chondromatosisTraumatic etiologyJoint effusionNumerous brilliant white rice-grain size free bodies in arthroscopy (not radiographically)

Question: Features of Ankylosing spondylitis (AS) include all of the following EXCEPT:
A. Fibrous ankylosis is pa of pathogenesis of AS
B. Bony ankylosis is pa of pathogenesis of AS
C. Roos test is used to test for Sacroilitis
D. Marginal syndesmophytes are seen on X-ray
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: FEATURES of ankylosing spondilitis- enthesitis and this ultimately leads to joint ankylosis Both bony as well as fibrous ankylosis occurs in AS Marginal syndesmophytes are seen on X-ray Roos test is used for thoracic outlet syndrome.

Question: "Pointing index" is due to paralysis of:
A. Median nerve
B. Ulnar nerve
C. Radial nerve
D. Auxiliary nerve
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. is 'a' i.e. Median nerve Pointing index:On asking the pt. to make a fist, it is noticed that the index finger remains straight.This is d/t Paralysis of the flexor digitorum superficialis and that of lateral half of the flexor digitorum profundus muscle (to the index finger) in median nerve palsy at a level of proximal to elbow.*Some other related questions:* Wrist drop is seen in*-Radial nerve palsy* Foot drop is seen in*-Common peroneal nv palsy.Winging of the scapula*Claw hand(Main -en -griffe):-Long thoracic nerve palsy.* Partial claw hand*-Ulnar nerve palsy* Complete claw hand*-Ulnar +Median nerve palsy* Ape thumb deformity*-Median nerve palsy* Pointing index*-Median nerve palsy* Policeman's tip deformity*-Also k/a Erb's paralysis d/t injury in the region of the upper trunk of the brachial plexus.Nerve roots involved are mainly C5 & partly C6.

Question: Bulge sign in knee joint is seen after how much fluid accumulation-
A. 100 ml
B. 400 ml
C. 200 ml
D. < 30 ml
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: BULGE TEST is a useful method of testing when there is very little fluid in the joint.Usually occurs in medial meniscal injury. It can detect even 30 ml of fluid accumulation. After squeezing any fluid out of the suprapatellar pouch,the medial compament is emptied by pressing on the inner aspect of the joint; that hand is lifted away and the lateral side is sharply compressed-a distinct ripple is seen on the flattened medial surface as fluid is shunted across. REF:APLEY'S 9TH EDITION PAGE NO.550

Question: Material used in verterbroplasty is :
A. Isomethyl methacrylate
B. Isoethyl methacrylate
C. Polyethyl methacrylate
D. Polymethyl methacrylate
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ans. is 'd' i.e. Polymethyl methacrylate Vertebroplasty and kyphoplasty are interventional radiologic procedures for the treatment of the intense pain refractory to medical management or bracing caused by vertebral compression fracture associated with osteoporosis, tumors, and trauma.Vertebroplasty and kyphoplasty involve intraosseous injection of acrylic cement- polymethyl methacrylate under local anesthesia and fluoroscopic guidance.Pain reduction or elimination is immediate, and the risk of complications is low. Neither vertebroplasty nor kyphoplasty are intended for the treatment of intervertebral disc disease or arthritis.Vertebroplasty may also be applied prophylactically to an at-risk vertebra between 2 other abnormal vertebrae.Vertebroplasty does not restore the height of the compressed vertebral body. A related procedure, kyphoplasty, is intended to restore lost height by inflating a balloon pump within and between the fracture fragments prior to the infusion of the cement. Both procedures result in similar relief of pain due to vertebral compression fractures.The risks of the procedure are low and include extravasation of cement into the epidural space causing myelopathy, or fatal pulmonary embolism from extension of cement into paraspinous veins.

Question: A 33 yr /M has history of A, now complaints of pain left hip. On examination there is Flexion, External Rotation of left lower limb is present. There is 7 cm shoening of left lower limb, there is a gluteal mass felt which moves with the movement of femoral shaft, most probable diagnosis could be?
A. Anterior dislocation of hip
B. Central fracture dislocation
C. Posterior dislocation
D. Pipkin's type 4 fracture
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Anterior dislocation is ruled out because it will have Flexion Abduction External Rotation with lengthening and anterior femoral head (Mass that moves with femur shaft is femur head). Central dislocation is ruled out because it will have shoening and femur head palpable on per rectal examination. Posterior dislocation will have Flexion Adduction and internal rotation with shoening and gluteal femoral head. Pipkins type IV: Shoening and gluteal mass with atypical features Type I: Femoral head fracture caudal to fovea centralis. Type II: Femoral head fracture cephalad to the fovea. Type III: Femoral head fracture associated with femoral neck fracture. Type IV: Type I, II or III with associated acetabular fracture.

Question: Causes of a painless limp in infancy includes:
A. Congenital dislocation of hip
B. Infantile coxa vara
C. Poliomyelitis
D. All of the above
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Painless Limp Painful Limp 1-3 years age group: DDH Cerebral palsy Muscular dystrophy Infantile coxa vara 4-10 years age: Limb length discrepancy Poliomyelitis Legg Calve Pehes disease Slipped capital femoral epiphysis Osteochondritis dissecans -Lateral surface of medial femoral condyle Ahritis/Synovitis/Osteomyelitis

Question: Column concept of spine stability was given by -
A. Denis
B. Frenkel
C. Wilson
D. Todd
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: REF : textbook of ohopedics, John ebnezer, 4th edition ,pg.no.311 Three column concept of spine stability was given by Denis *The anterior column consists of anterior half of the veebral body , anterior pa of the disk & anterior longitudinal ligament. * The middle column consists of posterior half of the body & the disk , posterior longitudinal ligament. *The posterior column consists of the posterior veebral arch consisting of transverse process , spinous process & the accompanying ligaments. One column injury is stable , 2 column injury is unstable - it is a dangerous spine for it may injure the spinal cord.

Question: A female with H/o oligohydramnios during her pregnancy, brings her newborn baby to OPD, on noticing asymmetric thigh folds in her child. The examiner performs flexion, IR and abduction, which produces a click sound. Which is the test done by the examiner?
A. Oolani test
B. Von Rosen test
C. Mc Murray's test
D. Barlow's test
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Clinical Diagnosis - DDH based on the following 1. Abduction is limited (especially in flexion) 2. Asymmetric thigh folds Oolani's Test--the first two alphabets O and R (Oolani for Reduction) and for Reduction we do abduction of hip. It is similar to 2nd pa of Barlow's test McMurray circumduction test is used to evaluate individuals for tears in the meniscus of the knee

Question: Ring sequestrum causes:
A. Typhoid osteomyelitis
B. Chronic osteomyelitis
C. Amputation stump
D. Tuberculosis osteomyelitis
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Sequestrum is the dead bone separated out from the living bone by the granulation tissue. The factors responsible for bone death in chronic osteomyelitis are: raised intravascular pressure Vascular stasis and small vessel thrombosis periosteal stripping bacterial toxins Sequestrum is the hall mark of chronic osteomyelitis Ring sequestrum causes : Ring sequestrum * Amputation stump * Pin tract infection Cylindrical/pencil like Infants Green Pseudomonas osteomyelitis Black Amputation stump due to exposure of bone with air.

Question: Which is the most common joint involved in thalassemia?
A. Hip
B. Knee
C. Shoulder
D. Ankle
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. B. Knee* Most common joint involved in thalassemia is Knee joint.* Most common orthopedic symptom in thalassemia is leg pain.

Question: Which of the following is a treatment option for Volkmann's ischemia?
A. Fasciotomy
B. Cock up splint
C. Bone shortening
D. Turn buckle splint
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. A. FasciotomyVolkmann's ischemia is synonymous with Compartment syndrome. If the same is missed, there occurs necrosis followed by fibrosis of forearm flexors leading to a flexion contracture in hand also called as Volkmann's ischemic contracture.

Question: Supraspinatus injury leads to which of the following:
A. Frozen shoulder
B. Winging of scapula
C. Cannot abduct
D. Cannot adduct
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. (c) Cannot abductRef. Apley's System of Orthopaedics & Fractures, 8th ed. 281-82In case of supraspinatus injury, abduction is restricted.Function of Rotator Cuff Muscle* Supraspinatus: Assists deltoid in abduction of arm by fixing head of humerus against the glenoid cavity.* Infraspinatus & Teres minor: Laterally (externally) rotates arm & stabilizes the shoulder joint.* Subscapularis: Internal rotation

Question: A scooter is hit from behind. The rider is thrown off and he lands with his head hitting the kerb. He does not move, complains of severe pain in the neck and is unable to turn his head. Well-meaning onlookers rush up to him and try to make him sit up. What would be the best course of action in this situation?
A. He should be propped up and given some water to drink
B. He should not be propped up but turned on his face and rushed to the hospital
C. He should be turned on his back and a support should be placed behind his neck and transported to the nearest hospital
D. He should not be moved at all but carried to the nearest hospital in the same position in which he has been since his fall.
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Patients are usually transported to the emergency department on a hard backboard with neck immobilized by hard cervical collor.
The head and neck to be aligned with the long axis of trunk and immobilized in supine position.
The patient should be secured so that in the event of emesis; the backboard may be rotated 90° while the patient remains fully immobilize in a neutral position.

Question: An athletic teenage girl complains of anterior knee pain on climbing stairs and on getting up after prolonged sitting. Which of the following is the most likely diagnosis?
A. Chondramalacia Patellae
B. Plica Syndrome
C. Bipaite Patella
D. Patellofemoral osteoahritis
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: CAUSES: Mechanical overload of the patellofemoral joint. a) Malcongruence - patellofemoral surfaces b) Malalignment -- extensor mechanism - weakness of vastus medialis ingle injury -- damage to aicular surface CLINICAL FEATURES * Introspective teenage girl or athletic young adult * Flat foot / Knock kneed athletes * Spontaneous Pain in front of knee/ beneath the knew cap * Maybe h/o recurrent displacements/injury * Aggravated by activity/climbing down stairs/standing after prolonged sitting with knees flexed * Both knees * Swelling-give way-catching(not true locking) * Grating/grinding sensation when knee is extended Conservative Rx * Reassurance * Ice Application * Physiotherapy * Avoid stressful activities * Stretching and strengthening medial quadriceps in 15 mins 4 times/day -- Quad sets (bicycling, pool running, swimming flutter kick * Aspirin / Ibuprofen / Naproxen * Suppo for a valgus foot STEROIDS BEST AVOIDED ref : maheswari 9th ed

Question: Nerve injured in fracture of medial epicondyle of humerus -
A. Anterior interosseous
B. Median
C. Ulnar
D. Radial
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. is 'c' i.e., UlnarSite of injuryNerve injuredFracture surgical neck humerusAxillary nerveFracture shaft humerusRadial nerveSupracondylar fractureMedian nerve (anterior interosseous branch)Medial epicondyle fractureUlnar nervePosterior dislocation of HIPSciatic nerveFibular neck fractureCommon peroneal nerve

Question: Investigation of choice for lumbar prolapsed disc
A. X-ray
B. CT Scan
C. MRI
D. Myelogram Patt
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Investigation of choice for PID at any level is MRI.

Question: The most common sequelae of tuberculous spondylitis in an adolescent is:
A. Fibrous ankylosis
B. Bony-ankylosis
C. Pathological dislocation
D. Chronic osteomyelitis
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: (b)- The usual outcome of healed tuberculosis in spine is the bony ankylosis and in peripheral joints like Hip and Knee Fibrous ankylosis is seen.

Question: What causes both destruction of bone and reduction of joint space?
A. Tuberculosis
B. Metastasis
C. Multiple myeloma
D. Lymphoma
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: (a)TB in spine involves- 2 Vertebra (Bone) + Disk (Cartilage)- Paradiscal- Anterior (to spinal cord)Note: Involvement of posterior elements and single vertebra is relatively rare in TB.

Question: All are synonymous to radial styloid fracture except
A. Chauffer's fracture
B. Hutchinson fracture
C. Backfire fracture
D. March fracture
Correct Answer: D

Question: Chondroblastoma most commonly occurs in :
A. Metaphysis
B. Diaphysis
C. Epiphysis
D. Medullary cavity
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. is 'c' ie Epiphysis Apley's orthopedics writes - "Chondroblastoma is one of the few lesion to appear primarily in the epiphysis"

Question: All are associated with chronic osteomyelitis except-
A. Amyloidosis
B. Sequestrum
C. Metastatic abnormality
D. Myositis ossificans
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Complications of chronic osteomyelitis

Following complications can occur : -


Acute exacerbation Growth abnormalities due to damage to adjacent growth plate: - Shortening, Deformities.
Pathological fracture
Joint stiffness
Sinus tract malignancy (very rare): - Squamous cell carcinoma
Amyloidosis

Question: Madelung's deformity involves -
A. Humerus
B. Proximal ulna
C. Distal radius
D. Carpals
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. is 'c' i.e., Distal radiusMadelung's deformityo Madelung's deformity is a congenital disorder that affects growth of distal radius.o The primary defect is failure of normal growth of medial and palmar halves of the distal radial physis, leading to curvature in an medial (ulnar) and palmar direction,o The ulna is relatively long and becomes prominent dorsally.o The carpus (carpal bones) sinks, along with the medial (ulnar) half of the distal radial articular surface, into the gaps between the two forearm bones.

Question: Oolani&;s test is used in
A. congenital dislocation of knee
B. Obstetric brachial plexus injury
C. Developmental dysplasia of hip
D. Tom Smith's ahritis
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: OOLANI&;STEST is used to test DDH in infants In this test the baby&;s thighs are held with the thumbs medially and the fingers resting on the greater trochanters; the hips are flexed to 90 degrees and gently abducted. In NORMAL baby, there is smooth abduction to almost 90 degrees. In CONGENITAL DISLOCATION the movement is usually impeded,but if pressue is applied to the greater trochantehere is a soft &;CLUNK&; as the dislocation reduces,and then the hip abducts fully(JERK OF ENTRY) If abduction stops halfway and there is no jerk of entry, there may be an irreducible dislocation. ref:APLEY&;S 9th edition page no.499

Question: All are common sites of primary for bone metastasis except-
A. Breast
B. Prostate
C. Brain
D. Kidney
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. is 'c' i.e., Brain o Metastatic bone disease is the commonest malignancy of bones and is much more common than primary bone tumors.o The commonest sites for bone metastases are vertebrae (most common), pelvis, the proximal half of the femur and the humerus.o Extremities distal to elbow and knee are least commonly involved sites.o Spread is usually via the blood stream; occasionally, visceral tumors spread directly into adjacent bones e.g., the pelvis and ribs.o Certain tumors are known to be common sources of bone metastasis.o The following primary tumors are the most common to metastasize in the bone; breast, prostate, lung, thyroid, kidney, and gastrointestinal tract.o The commonest source of metastatic bone disease is carcinoma of the breast.o In males most common source is prostate carcinoma.o Bladder and uterine carcinomas are less common sources.o In children, skeletal metastases originate from neuroblastoma, Ewing's sarcoma, and osteosarcoma.

Question: Patient presented with loss of sensations in the lateral three and a half fingers. Which of the following will be an additional finding in this patient?
A. Opponens paralysis
B. Loss of sensation on hypothenar eminence
C. Atrophy of adductor pollicis
D. None of the above
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: This is the case of median nerve injury; sensation is lost over area supplied by median nerve. Findings: Injury or compression of median nerve at wrist (e.g. Carpal tunnel syndrome) can be tested by 1. Pen test for abductor pollicis brevis there is inability to touch the pen kept above the palm by thumb abduction 2. Ape thumb deformity (In median nerve palsy, the thumb is adducted and laterally rotated and lies in same plane as rest of finger, due to unopposed action of extensor pollicis longus (radial nerve) and adductor pollicis (ulnar nerve). 3. Loss of opposition 4. Sensory loss lateral 3 1/2 of digits and 2/3rd palm (autonomous zone is tip of index and middle finger) 5. Loss of sensation over thenar eminence 6. Anterior dislocation of lunate may cause median nerve compression.

Question: Commonest presentation of congenital dislocation of the knee is -
A. Varus
B. Valgus
C. Flexion
D. Hyperextens ion
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: The patient presents with hyperextension deformity of the knee.

Question: Circumduction test is used for
A. Anterior shoulder instability
B. Posterior shoulder instability
C. Inferior shoulder instability
D. Either of above
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ref : essential ohopaedic maheshwari 9th ed

Question: A specific test for gout is -
A. Raised serum uric acid level
B. Raised uric acid in synovial fluid of joint
C. Raised urea level
D. Raised urease enzyme level
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Demonstration of intracellular monosodium urate crystals (MSU) in synovial fluid from affected joint is diagnostic of gout.

Question: Ator fracture is -
A. Fracture neck of talus
B. Fracture scaphoid
C. Fracture calcaneum
D. Fracture 5th metatarsal
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Fracture neck of talus results from forced dorsiflexion of the ankle. Typically this injury is sustained in an aircraft crash where the rubber bar is driven forcibly against the middle of the sole of the foot (ATOR&;s fracture), resulting in forced dorsiflexion of the ankle, the neck being a weak area, gives way. Reference - Essential ohopaedics- Maheshwari -5th edn pg no 166.

