Question: Which of the following agents is most commonly associated with recurrent meningitis due to CSF leaks?
A. Meningococci
B. Pneumococci
C. Hemophilus Influenza
D. E. Coli
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Intracranial CSF leaks cause bacterial meningitis, about 80% are caused by S. Pneumoniae. Other causative organisms are meningococcus, Hemophilus species and S.aurues. Ref: Clinical Pediatric Neurology By Ronald B. David, Page 217

Question: For TOF management in antenatal period includes ?
A. Balloon valvotomy
B. Open hea surgery
C. Karyotyping
D. Aspirin
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. is 'c' i.e., KaryotypingTOF has been associated with untreated maternal diabetes, phenylketonuria, and intake of retinoic acid.Associated chromosomal anomalies occur in 30% cases and include trisomies 21, 18, 13 and 22q11 microdeletion, especially in pulmonary atresia and absent pulmonary valve syndrome (APVS).There is also a high association with extra - cardiac anomalies in paicular, abdominal and thoracic abnormalities.When a TOF is diagnosed during fetal life, karyotyping and targeted morphologic ultrasound examination should be offered.Isolated TOF - Good prognosis in TOF with pulmonary stenosis (>90% survival after surgery).However, other forms of TOF such as pulmonary atresia and absent pulmonary valve syndrome do not have a good prognosis (moderate prognosis for pulmonary atresia and bad prognosis for APVS).

Question: All of the following are causes of congenital blindness Except
A. Toxoplasmosis
B. Congenital rubella
C. Vitamin A deficiency
D. Cataract
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Causes of congenital blindness:ToxoplasmosisCongenital cataractsGenetic diseaseCongenital rubellaCongenital glaucomaUsher syndrome(Refer: Nelson's Textbook of Pediatrics, SAE, 1st edition, pg no. 318 - 319)

Question: An ill 16 days old baby girl is brought to the emergency. On examination pallor and dyspnoea present with a respiratory rate of 85 per minute. Her HR is 200 bpm, hea sounds are distant and a gallop is heard. X-ray showed cardiomegaly. An echocardiogram shows dilated ventricles and dilation of the left atrium. An ECG shows ventricular depolarization complexes that have low voltage. Which of the following is the most likely diagnosis?
A. CHF
B. Glycogen storage disease
C. Pericarditis
D. Aberrant left coronary aery arising from pulmonary aery
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: In CHF pallor, dyspnoea, tachypnoea, tachycardia and cardiomegaly are common regardless of the cause.The most common causes of CHF in children include myocarditis caused by adenovirus and coxsackievirus B.The echocardiogram shows ventricular and left atrial dilatation as well as poor ventricular function. With glycogen storage disease of the hea muscle thickening would be expected. With pericarditis- pericardial effusion is seen. On ECG, the voltages of the ventricular complexes seen with aberrant origin of the left coronary aery are not diminished, and a pattern of myocardial infarction can be seen. *

Question: Asymmetric tonic neck reflex (ATNR) disappears at ______
A. 6 months
B. 5 months
C. 9 months
D. 8 months
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Asymmetric tonic reflex (ATNR) diappears by 6-7 months postnatally The tonic neck reflex is produced by manually rotating the infant&;s head to 1 side and observing for the characteristic fencing posture (extension of the arm on the side to which the face is rotated and flexion of the conralateral arm) An obligatory tonic neck response, in which the infant becomes "stuck" in the fencing posture, is always abnormal and implies a CNS disorder Ref: Nelson 21st edition pgno: 3059

Question: True about polio:
A. Paralytic polio is most common
B. Spastic paralysis seen
C. IM injections and increased muscular activity lead to increased paralysis
D. Polio drops in pulse polio immunisation given only in <3 years old children
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: False 90-95% of polio infections are asymptomatic False Acute flaccid paralysis is seen in Polio & not spastic paralysis True Risk of paralytic polio is increased by tonsillectomy, strenous physical exercise, tooth extraction,Injection (intramuscular) False OPV drops are given to all children less than 5 yr age in pulse polio immunisation

Question: In RDS all of the following statements are true except
A. Usually occurs in infants born before 34 weeks of gestation
B. Is more common in babies born to diabetic mothers
C. Leads to cyanosis
D. Is treated by administering 100% oxygen
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Administration of 100% oxygen may increase the O2 load on fetal lung tissue. Hence, it is not given . Reference: GHAI Essential pediatrics, 8th edition

Question: A normally developing 10 months old child should be able to do all of the following except –
A. Stand alone
B. Play peak to boo
C. Pick up a pellet with thumb and index finger
D. Build a tower of 3–4 cubes
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: A child starts trying to build a tower of cubes (2 cubes) by the age of 1 year.

About other options

Child can stand with support by 9 months.
Child can play peak-a-boo game by 10 months.
Child can pick up a pellet with thumb and index finger (pincer grasp) by 9 months.

Question: Late metabolic acidosis is seen in-
A. Term infant given formula feed
B. Preterm baby getting cow milk
C. Long term breast feeding
D. None of the above
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. is 'b' i.e., Preterm baby getting cow milk Late metabolic acidosis (LMA) o Late metabolic acidosis is a special type of acidosis in apparently healthy premature infant. o This hyperchloremic acidosis appeares during second and third week of life, and resolves spontaneously within a couple of weeks. Definition "An acidosis occuring after second day of life, in which base excess values are lower than -5meq/L on two consecutive estimations done at least 24 hours apa". Etiology o Prematurity is the most impoant single predisposing factor in the development of LMA. o The incidence varies considerably depending upon the gestational maturity and protein content of feeding formula. o In preterm neonates fed on a modified cow's milk the risk of developing LMA is very high.

Question: Rett's syndrome occurs due to deficiency of ?
A. Niacin
B. Biotin
C. Carotene
D. Vit D
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. is 'b' i.e., Biotin

Question: Macrosomia is a
A. Large size baby
B. Big mouth
C. Large head
D. Large tongue
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Macrosomia:- A condition where a baby is large before bihFactors causing macrosomia:Mother having diabetesMother having gestational diabetesObese mother(Refer: Nelson's Textbook of Pediatrics, SAE, 1st edition, pg no. 777, 897 - 899)

Question: In marasmus, which of the following is not seen?
A. Edema
B. Voracious appetite
C. Hepatomegaly not seen
D. Child is active
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Edema is a feature of Kwashiorkor, not seen in marasmus. Kwashiorkor Marasmus Edema Present absent appetite poor Voracious appetite CNS involvement apathy Active child Hepatomegaly seen Not seen Skin and hair changes More common Less common

Question: A preterm baby is born with synchronised upper chest movement, minimal nasal flare, expiratory grunting heard by the stethoscope, but has no chest or xiphoid retractions. The Silverman score is:
A. 1
B. 2
C. 3
D. 4
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: The Silverman Anderson retraction score of respiratory distress syndrome (RDS): Upper chest Lower chest Xiphoid retraction Nares dilatation Expiratory grunt Grade 0 Synchronised No retraction None None None Grade 1 Lag on inspiration Just visible Just visible Minimal By stethoscope Grade 2 See-saw Marked Marked Marked Without stethoscope Mild RDS: Score 1-3 Moderate RDS: 4-7 Severe RDS: 7-10 Ref: Advances in Pediatrics by Dutta By Jaypee Brothers, Medical Publishers, 2007, Page 89.

Question: 3-year-old child comes in ER with Hv'o vomiting, loose watery motion for 3 days, on examination, the child was drowsy, sunken eye. Hypothermia and skin pinch take time to revert back, diagnosis
A. No dehydration
B. Mild dehydration
C. Some dehydration
D. Severe dehydration
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: on  A child with severe dehydration will have at least two of the following four signs: sensorium is abnormally sleepy or lethargic, sunken eyes, drinking poorly or not at all, and a very slow skin pinch.
A child with some signs of dehydraon will have two of the following: restlessness or irritability, sunken eyes, drinking eagerly or slow skin pinch.
A child with either one or none of these signs is classified as having no signs of death

Question: Bidextrous grip is seen at what age?
A. 4 months
B. 5 months
C. 6 months
D. 7 months
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. A. 4 monthsFINE MOTOR MILESTONES: AgeMilestone4 monthsBidextrous reach6 monthsUnidextrous reach9 monthsImmature pincer grasp12monthsMature pincer grasp15monthsImitates scribbling, tower of 2 blocks18monthsScribbles, tower of 3 blocks2 yearsTower of 6 blocks, veical & circular stroke3 yearsTower of 9 blocks, copies circle4 yearsCopies cross, bridge with blocks5 yearsCopies triangle

Question: When a child is not able to perform the following motor functions such as skipping, walking on heels, hopping in place or going forwards in tandem gati, his motor development is considered to be below ?
A. 3 years
B. 4 years
C. 6 years
D. 8 years
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. is 'b' i.e., 4 years o A child hops on one foot by 4 years and skips by 5 years. o As this child can not hop, the age of this child is less than 4 years.

Question: New born term baby born by vaginal delivers' had respiratory' distress, grunt, with scaphoid abdomen -Most probable diagnosis is -
A. HMD
B. Diphragmatic hernia
C. Pneumothorax
D. Meconium aspiration syndrome
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. is 'b' i.e., Diaphragmatic hernia o Diaphragmatic Hernia is defined as a communication between abdominal & thoracic cavities with or without abdominalContents in thorax.MC Bochdalek type.More common on left (85%)30% of CDH have associated anomalesCardiac anomalis is MC anomalis.In cardiac (Hypoplastic left heart syndrome most common).o X ray showing multiple gas locales within the lower left chest, the majority of the rest of the left lung opacified. The left hemidiaphragm can not be seen. The mediastinum and the heart are deviated to the contralateral right side.

Question: In children with classical galactosemia all are true except:
A. E. coli neonatal sepsis is common
B. Elimination of galactose in diet will not reverse cataract
C. Galactose conves to galactitol which is toxic to brain
D. Children with Duae variant of galactosemia are asymptomatic
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: E. coli sepsis is common and the onset often precedes the diagnosis of galactosemia Elimination of galactose reverse growth failure, cataract, renal and hepatic dysfunction Galactokinase deficiency -> accumulation of galactose and galactitol Duae variant- a single amino acid substitution, has 50% of normal enzyme activity- asymptomatic

Question: Craniotabes is seen in following except –
A. Rickets
B. Syphilis
C. Osteogenesis imperfecta
D. Thalassemia
Correct Answer: D

Question: Daily maintenance fluid for a child weighing 24 kg is:
A. 1000 mL/day
B. 800 mL/day
C. 1540 mL/day
D. 1580 mL/day
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Fluid requirement in a child in this child weighing 24 kg is:1540 mL. For first 10 kg: 100ml/kg For next 10 kg : 50ml/kg For each kg. above 20 : 20 ml/kg (1-10 kg) 100 x 10 = 1000 mL (11-20 kg) 50 x 10 = 500 mL; For next 4 kg (21-24 kg) 20 x 4= 80 mL

Question: The concetration of potassium in microgram in ORS is-
A. 30 meq
B. 20 meq
C. 90 meq
D. 60 meq
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. is 'b' i.e., 20 meq

Question: Abnormal mousy/mushy odour of urine is associated with
A. Phenylketonuria
B. Tyrosinemia
C. Maple syrup urine disease
D. Hawkinsuria
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. a (Phenylketonuria) (Ref. Harrison's Internal Medicine 17th/Ch. 358)Inborn errors of amino acid metabolism associated with abnormal odourInborn error of metabolismUrine odorGlutaric acidemia (type II)Sweaty feet, acridHawkinsinuriaSwimming poolIsovaleric acidemiaSweaty feet, acridMaple syrup urine diseaseMaple syrup/Burnt sugarHypermethioninemiaBoiled cabbageMultiple carboxylase deficiencyTomcat urineOasthouse urine diseaseHops-likePhenylketonuriaMousy or mustyTrimethylaminuriaRotting fishTyrosinemiaBoiled cabbage, rancid butterTHE HYPERPHENYLALANINEMIAS# result from impaired conversion of phenylalanine to tyrosine.# The most common and clinically important is phenylketonuria (frequency 1:10,000), which is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by an | concentration of phenylalanine and its by-products in body fluids and by severe mental retardation if untreated in infancy.# It results from | activity of phenylalanine hydroxylase (phenylketonuria type I).# The accumulation of phenylalanine inhibits the transport of other amino acids required for protein or neurotransmitter synthesis, reduces synthesis and increases degradation of myelin, and leads to inadequate formation of norepinephrine and serotonin.# Phenylalanine is a competitive inhibitor of tyrosinase, a key enzyme in the pathway of melanin synthesis, and ac- counts for the hypopigmentation of hair and skin.# Untreated children with classic phenylketonuria are normal at birth but fail to attain early developmental milestones, develop microcephaly, and demonstrate progressive impairment of cerebral function.# Hyperactivity, seizures, and severe mental retardation are major clinical problems later in life.# EEG abnormalities; "mousy" odor of skin, hair, and urine (due to phenylacetate accumulation); and a tendency to hypopigmentation and eczema are devastating clinical picture.# In contrast, affected children who are detected and treated at birth show none of these abnormalities.Treatment# To prevent mental retardation, diagnosis and initiation of dietary treatment of classic phenylketonuria must occur before the child is 3 weeks of age.# Dietary phenylalanine restriction is usually instituted if blood phenylalanine levels are >250 pmol/L (4 mg/dL).# Treatment consists of a special diet low in phenylalanine and supplemented with tyrosine, since tyrosine becomes an essential amino acid in phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency.# With therapy, plasma phenylalanine cone should be maintained between 120 and 360 pmol/L (2 and 6 mg/dL).# Dietary restriction should be continued and monitored indefinitely..# Pregnancy risks can be minimized by continuing lifelong phenylalanine-restricted diets and assuring strict phenylalanine restriction 2 months prior to conception and throughout gestation.ConditionEnzyme DefectClinical FindingsInheritance1. Phenylketonuria type IPhenylalanine hydroxylaseMental retardation, microcephaly, hypopig- mented skin and hairs, eczema, "mousy" odorAR2. Phenylketonuria type IIDihydropteridine reductaseMental retardation, hypotonia, spasticity, myoclonusAR3. Phenylketonuria type III6-Pyruvoyl- tetrahydropterin synthaseDystonia, neurologic deterioration, seizures, mental retardationAR4. GTP cyclohydrolase I deficiencyGTP cyclohydrolase IMental retardation, seizures, dystonia, temperature instabilityAR5. Carbinolamine dehydratase deficiencyPterin-4-carbinolamine dehydrataseTransient hyperphenylalaninemia (benign)AR

Question: Small cuff size will lead to?
A. Falsely increased BP
B. Falsely low BP
C. No effect on BP
D. Fluctuating BP
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: a. Falsely increased BP(Ref: Nelson's 20/e p 2164)In older children, a mercury sphygmomanometer with a cuff that covers approximately two-thirds of the upper part of the arm or leg may be used for blood pressure measurement. A cuff that is too small results in falsely high readings, whereas a cuff that is too large records slightly decreased pressure.

Question: A 1 year old child is brought to you with delayed milestones. On examination you note that the child is very fair with hypopigmented hair and blue eye. He has also got eczemas. The child was also very irritable. What is your diagnosis?
A. Albinism
B. Phenylketonuria
C. Alkaptonuria
D. Cystinosis
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: This child is suffering from Phenylketonuria. Here there is inability to conve phenylalanine to tyrosine due to phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency. The decreased pigmentation in this condition is due to reduced melanin formation. The treatment is a diet low in phenylalanine with tyrosine supplementation. Delay in initiation of treatment will lead to mental retardation. Ref: Essential revision notes for MRCP by Philip A Kalra, Edition 3, Page - 322 ; Harrison, Edition 17, Page - 2470

Question: Which of the following is false regarding neonatal resuscitation?
A. T - tube delivers free flow oxygen
B. Self - inflating bag should not be used without reservoir
C. Self - inflating bag can deliver free flow oxygen
D. Flow inflating bag delivers free flow oxygen
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: 1. T - tube delivers free flow oxygen - TRUE 2. Self - inflating bag should not be used without reservoir - FALSE - can be used but FiO2 will be less. 3. Self - inflating bag can deliver free flow oxygen - TRUE 4. Flow inflating bag delivers free flow oxygen - TRUE

Question: Which of the following is seen in cystic fibrosis?
A. Low sweat chloride levels
B. Elevated sweat chloride levels
C. Low sweat sodium levels
D. Elevated sweat potassium levels
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: b. Elevated sweat chloride levels(Ref: Nelson's 20/e p 2100)Because the function of sweat gland duct cells is to absorb rather than secrete chloride, salt is not retrieved from the isotonic primary sweat as it is transported to the skin surface; chloride and sodium levels are consequently elevated. So sweat chloride is usually 60mEq/L in cystic fibrosis.

Question: Most common cause for acute infantile gastroenteritis is?
A. Adenovirus
B. E coli
C. Norwalk virus
D. Rota virus
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: ANSWER: (D) Rota virusREF: www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov, J Clin Microbiol v. 26(12); Dec 1988Though none of the text books specifically mention most common causes of acute infantile gastroenteritis, most of the literature search in pubmed , cochrane and medscape and major text books of pediatrics point to: Viruses are more common causes of gastroenteritits in children. Of the viruses most common is rotavirus.Other viruses implicated are calciviruses, Norwalk, adenovirus.Also E.coli is a major cause of diarrhea in children.Other bacteria are: campylobacterium, yersinia enterocolitica, A. hydrophillia .

Question: Most common cause of neonatal meningitis-
A. Staphylococcus
B. E. coli
C. H. influenze
D. Pneumococcus
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. is 'b' i.e., E. coli o E. coli & streptococcus agalactie (group B streptococci) are the two most common cause of neonatal sepsis and meningitis.

Question: Daily water requirement in child weighing 30 kgs, height 123 m and BSA of 1 m2 is-
A. 1300 m1
B. 1700 ml
C. 2000 ml
D. 2500 ml
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. is 'b' i.e., 1700 ml Fluid requirment in a child o It depends on the weight of a child :- Weight Water requirments < 10 kg o 100 ml/kg/day 10-20 kg o 100 ml / kg / day for first 10 kg (i.e. 1000 ml) + 50 ml / kg / d for every kg above 10 kg. >20 kg o 100 ml/kg/day for first 10 kg (i.e. 1000 ml) + 50 ml / kg / d for next 10 kg (i.e. 500 ml) + 20 ml / kg / d for every kg above 20 kg. o The child in question has weight of 30 kg. o So, fluid requirment will be :- i) 1000 ml for first 10 kg Plus ii) 500 ml for 10-20 kg Plus iii) 200 ml (20 x 10) for 20-30 kg o Total requirment will be 1700 ml.

Question: Chromosome involved in Wilm's tumor is
A. 11
B. 13
C. 18
D. 22
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: WTl is the best characterized Wilms tumor gene. It is located at chromosome llp13 and encodes for a transcription factor that is critical for normal development of kidneys and gonads. WT2 is localized to a cluster of genes at llpl5. Reference: Essential paediatrics; O.P.Ghai; Childhood Malignancies; Page no: 617

Question: Aerosolized ribavirin is used in the treatment of bronchiolitis with –
A. RSV
B. H.influenza
C. Pneumococcus
D. Streptococcus
Correct Answer: A

Question: A child with three days history of upper respiratory tract infection presents with stridor, which decreases on lying down postion. What is the most probable diagnosis -
A. Acute Epiglottitis
B. Laryngotracheobronchitis
C. Foreign body aspiration
D. Retropharyngeal abscess
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. is 'b' i.e., Laryngotracheobronchitis This child has : - i) 3 days history of upper respiratory tract infection. ii) Followed by stridor These features suggest the diagnosis of croup. Clinical manifestations of Croup Most patients have an upper respiratory tract infection with some combination of - Rhinorrhea Pharyngitis Mild cough Low grade fever o After 1-3 days signs and symptoms of upper respiratory tract obstruction become apparent - Barking cough Hoarseness Inspiratory stridor

Question: A nineteen year old female with short stature, wide spread nipples and primary amenorrhoea most likely has karyotype of –
A. 47, XX + 18
B. 46XXXY
C. 47, XXY
D. 45 XO
Correct Answer: D

Question: True for Bochdalek hernia:
A. Commonly occurs on the right side
B. Congenital disorder
C. Anterior position
D. Breathing difficulty in newborns from day 2-3
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. B. Congenital disorderBochdalek hernia is the other name for congenital diaphragmatic hernia. It is a posterior (and not anterior) congenital defect of the diaphragm and is primarily due to lack of closure of the pleuroperitoneal cavity between the eighth and tenth week of embryonic life. Majority of cases occur on the left side. Affected newborns frequently present with breathing difficulty, particularly within the first few hours of life.

Question: Failure to initiate and maintain spontaneous respiration following birth is clinically k/a –
A. Birth asphyxia
B. RDS–Respiratory distress syndrome
C. Respiratory failure
D. Pulmonary oedema
Correct Answer: B

Question: Neurofibromatosis 1 criteria include all except:
A. Brain tumor
B. Acoustic neuromas
C. Dysplasia of the sphenoidal and tibial bone
D. Cafe-au-lait spots
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: In Neurofibromatosis 1 (NF1), two or more of the following clinical manifestations are present: Six or more Cafe-au-lait macules Axillary and inguinal freckling Two or more iris Lisch nodules Two or more neurofibromas or 1 plexiform neurofibroma A distinctive osseous lesion such as sphenoidal and tibial dysplasia Optic gliomas A 1st degree relative with NF1 Ref: Nelson textbook of pediatrics 21st edition pgno: 3141

Question: Children born to mothers with systemic lupus erythematosus are likely to have one of the following anomalies:
A. Atrial septal defect
B. Tetralogy of Fallot
C. Transposition of great vessels
D. Complete heart block
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: d. Complete heart block(Ref: Nelson's 20/e p 2171-2174, Ghai 8/e p 457-461)Congenital complete AV blockIt is presumed to be caused by autoimmune injury of fetal conduction system by maternally derived anti-SSA/Ro, anti-SSB/ La antibodies in a mother with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) or Sjogren syndromeAutoimmune disease accounts for 60-70% of all cases of congenital complete heart block

Question: Most common cause of Acute Aseptic Meningitis in children is
A. Arbovirus
B. Respiratory syncytial virus
C. Enterovirus
D. Herpes family
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: (C) Enterovirus # VIRAL CAUSES INCLUDE THE FOLLOWING: Enteroviruses - coxsackievirus, echovirus, poliovirus. Herpes simplex virus (HSV) types 1 and 2 (HSV-1, HSV-2) Varicella-zoster virus. Arboviruses, Epstein-Barr virus, HIV, Influenza virus types A and B, Mumps virus.> Many different viruses can cause meningitis.> About 90% of cases of viral meningitis are caused by members of a group of viruses known as Enteroviruses, such as Coxsacki-eviruses and Echoviruses.> These viruses are more common during summer and fall months.>Herpesviruses and the mumps virus can also cause viral meningitis.

Question: All are true regarding fetal BBC's except –
A. Elevated 2,3 DPG
B. Decreased carbonic anhydrase activity
C. Decreased life span
D. High RBC volume
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Fetal RBC contains less 2, 3 DPG.

Question: Extremely low birth weight -
A. <1000
B. <1500
C. <2500
D. <2800
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. (a) <1000 gmRef : OP Ghai 8th ed./125* Normal birth weight - 2800 gm- 3000gm* Low birth weight(LBW) - < 2500 gm* Very low birth weight(VLBW) - < 1500 gm* Extremely low birth weight (ELBW) - < 1000 gm.

Question: A 7 year old child with rheumatic heart disease presents with pallor, fever and a palpable spleen. The following investigations would be needed to arrive at a diagnosis except –
A. Electrocardiogram
B. Echocardiogram
C. Blood culture
D. Urine examination
Correct Answer: A

Question: True about Hodgkin's lymphoma are all except?
A. Often localized to single axial group of lymph nodes
B. Hepatomegaly is always present
C. Contiguous spread of lymph nodes
D. Can be cured by Chemotherapy and Radiotherapy
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: HODGKIN'S LYMPHOMA : - HL arises in lymphoid tissue & spreads to adjacent lymph node areas in a relatively orderly fashion. -Patients commonly present with painless, non-tender, firm, rubbery, cervical or supraclavicular lymphadenopathy and usually some degree of mediastinal involvement. HEPATOSPLENOMEGALY IS A FEATURE BUT NOT ALWAYS PRESENT - Chemotherapy & radiation therapy are both effective in treatment of HL. TREATMENT- A- Adriamycin (Doxorubicin) B - Bleomycin V - Vinblastine D - Dacarbazine

Question: A 9-month-old girl is brought with PR bleed, vomiting, mass in right lumbar region with masked liver dullness. She is in shock like condition. Management should include all of the following EXCEPT?
A. Barium enema
B. IV fluid
C. Give O2
D. Nasogastric tube
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: * In patients with prolonged intussusception with signs of shock, peritoneal irritation, intestinal perforation, reduction (with barium, saline or air) should not be attempted * Urgent laprotomy should be planned * But the first priority is urgent resuscitation ie A, B, C (airway, breathing, circulation). Hence in case of shock, and as the child in question is also vomiting, she should be made NPO and Nasogastric tube inseion should be done.

Question: 2-year-old child presents with sho stature and cafe-au lait spots. Bone marrow aspiration yields a little material and mostly containing fat. What is your diagnosis:
A. Fanconi anemia
B. Dyskeratosis congenita
C. Tuberous sclerosis
D. Osteogenesis imperfecta
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: - All features given in the question suggests the diagnosis of Fanconi anemia Common physical findings in Fanconi Anemia (FA): - Skin pigment changes including Cafe-au-lait spots (55% cases) - Sho stature (in 50% cases) - Microcephaly - Thumb and radial malformations - Renal and cardiac malformations - Hypogonadism - Associated with Aplastic anemia.

Question: True about Bochdalek hernia is -
A. Seen on right side
B. Anterior position
C. Differential diagnosis for pleuropericardial cyst
D. All
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. is 'c' i.e., Differential diagnosis for pleuropericardial cyst Differential diagnosis of CDH o Pulmonary sequestration o Cystic adenomatoid malformation o Pleuropericardial cysts

Question: Umbilical cord usually separates in newborns on:
A. Day 1
B. Day 2-3
C. Day 7-10
D. After 1 month
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. C. Day 7-10Umbilical cord is the connection between the mother and the fetus in the intrauterine stage and includes two arteries and one vein. It usually separates in children between day 7-10, either by dry gangrene or a residual moist base.

Question: Delayed pubey is when primary amenorrhea is seen without development of secondary sexual characters beyond the age of?
A. 12 years
B. 14 years
C. 16 years
D. 18 years
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Delayed pubey: Girls: Absence of secondary sexual characters by 13 yrs of age / Absence of menarche by 16 years of age / within 5 yrs of onset of pubey Boys: Lack of pubeal changes by 14 yrs of age

Question: Most common cause of central precocious pubey in girls:
A. Exogenous estrogen
B. Idiopathic
C. CNS tumor
D. Hypothyroidism
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: - MCC of central precocious pubey in girls is Idiopathic. - Organic causes are more common in boys. - OTHER CAUSES: Infections - TB, meningitis Injuries - Trauma, neurosurgery, Radiotherapy Tumors - Hypothalamic hamaoma (Gelastic seizures)- MCC of organic central precocious pubey CNS malformations like arachnoid cyst ,hydrocephalus, septo-optic dysplasia

Question: Congenital rubella syndrome - true is A/E?
A. Microcephaly
B. VSD
C. Conduction defect
D. All
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. is 'c' i.e., Conduction defect

Question: A baby is born at 27 weeks of gestation required mechanical ventilation for next 4 weeks & O2 for next 1 week. He maintained at room temperature subsequently. As per new Bronchopulmonary dysplasia definition, he has which of the following –
A. Mild BPD
B. Moderate BPD
C. Severe BPD
D. No BPD
Correct Answer: C

Question: Which drugs are used for prenatal therapy of congenital adrenal hyperplasia?
A. Hydrocoisone
B. Prednisolone
C. Fludrocoisone
D. Dexamethasone
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: High risk pregnancies should be staed of Dexamathasone, that readily crosses placenta, in an amount of 20 mu/kg in 2-3 divided doses. This surpasses secretion of steroids by fetal adrenals, including secretion of fetal adrenal androgens. If staed 6 weeks of gestation, it ameliorates virilization of external genitals in affected female fetus. Ref: Kligman, Behrman, Jenson, Stanton (2008), Chapter 577, "Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia", In the book, "Nelson's Textbook of Pediatrics", Volume 2, 18th Edition, New Delhi, Page 2364

Question: Which of the following reflex is NOT prominent in child at bih?
A. Moro's reflex
B. Glabellar tap
C. Crossed extensor reflex
D. Tonic neck reflex
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Tonic neck reflex is prominent between 2nd and 4th months. Persistence of reflex beyond the age of 6-9 months is abnormal. Impoant neonatal reflexes: Sucking, rooting, and swallowing reflexes Grasp reflex Moro's reflex Glabellar tap Crossed extension Ref: Essential paediatrics by OP Ghai, 6th edition, Page 146.

Question: Fatty acid present in breast milk which is important for growth and CNS development is:
A. Docosahexaenoic acid
B. Palmitic acid
C. Linoleic acid
D. Linolenic acid
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. A. Docosahexaenoic acidDocosahexaenoic acid (DHA) is a long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acid found in breast milk that plays a role in neurodevelopment. Breast milk DHA concentration is influenced by DHA in the mother's diet.

Question: According to WHO guideline, all are indications for hospital admission in Pneumonia except
A. Convulsions
B. Persistent vomiting
C. Chest indrawing
D. Severe malnutrition
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Child with chest indrawing ⇒ Pneumonia ⇒ Oral Amoxycillin
Rest are danger signs ⇒ Severe Pneumonia ⇒ Referal to hospital.

Question: True about Bater&;s syndrome are all except
A. Hyperkalemic alkalosis
B. Presents in neonate with ototoxicity have Bain gene mutation
C. Decreased K+ absorption from thick descending loop
D. Autosomal recessive
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Bater syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by hypokalemia and metabolic alkosis , resulting from excessive chloride, potassium and sodium wasting in thick ascending loop of Henle . Reference : Ghai pediatrics eighth edition pg no 501

Question: A child with jaundice being given food intravenously. Which of the following can occur out of it –
A. Infection
B. Hyperglycemia
C. Metabolic acidosis
D. All of these
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Complications of parentral nutrition in children 

Infections                     
Liver dysfunction
Hyperglycemia   
Metabolic acidosis
Hyperlipidemia
Electrolyte imbalance

Question: Nephrotic range of proteinuria is
A. > 30 mg/m2/hr
B. > 40 mg/m2/hr
C. > 2 gm/m2/24hrs
D. > 4 gm/m2/24hrs
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Nephrotic range of proteinuria is > 40 mg/m2/hr or  > 1 gm/m2/24hrs.

Question: Cardiac anomaly associted with TOF False is -
A. Cyanotic heart disease
B. RVH
C. ASD
D. VSD
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. is 'c' i.e., ASD Tetralogy of falloto Cyanotic heart disease (MC).o Defect in infundibular septum leads to :Pulmonary stenosisVSD (Not ASD)Dextroposition and overriding of aorta.Right ventricular hypertrophy (NOT LVH).o Pink TOF (Acyanotic TOF) when PS is mild to moderate balanced shunt tnt across the VSD, pt not have cyanosis.

Question: A mature pincer grasp is attained at ------ months
A. 8
B. 10
C. 12
D. 18
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Grasp is best as..~ by offering a red cube to the ol.j)d. A 6-month-old infant reaches and holds the cul-e {b.rg? object) in a crude manner usincr the ulnar asf'C'l-'i: of r~ hand (Fig. 3_27). He can transfer ~bjects from one h.md t::i oth~ by 6-1 months. The child is able to grasp from the radial side of hand at 8-9 months (Fig. 328). B\* the ab'" ci 1 year, mature grasp (index finuer and thumb) is e,iJo.t (Fig. 3.29). 0 By offering pellets (smaller object), finer hand skills;.:~ assessed. By 9-10 months, the child approaches the pelletby an index finger and lifts it using finger thumb apposition, termed 'pincer' gras

Question: Height of child acquire 100 cm in?
A. 2.5 year
B. 3.5 year
C. 4.5 year
D. 5.5 year
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. is 'c' i.e., 4.5 year

Question: Barr body is absent in female having
A. 46 XX genome
B. 45 X0 genome
C. 47 XXX
D. All of the above
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Barr body is absent in those with genotype 45 XO . For a brr body to be present a minimum of 2 x chromosomes should be there . No of Barr body = no of x chromosomes - 1. Reference: GHAI Essential pediatrics, 8th edition

Question: In Pediatric advanced life support, intraosseous access for drug/fluid administration is recommended for pediatric age of –
A. < 1 year age
B. < 5 years age
C. < 6 years age
D. Any age
Correct Answer: C

Question: What is the pathology of edema in nephrotic syndrome
A. Reduced plasma protein
B. Sodium and water retention
C. Increased venous pressure
D. Hyperlipidemia
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. b. Sodium and water retention Sodium and water retention is the pathology of edema in nephrotic syndrome. The nephrotic syndrome is characterized by proteinuria, edema, and hypoalbuminemia. Renal sodium retention and changes in variables of the Starling equation are fundamental to the pathophysiology of nephrotic edema. There is evidence for both intravascular volume expansion (overfilling) and intravascular volume depletion (under filling) in patients with nephrosis. Microvascular fluid exchange is described using a formulation of the Starling driving forces (DP and Dp) and it is through this equation that nephrotic edema is conceptualized. Previous theories have focused on abnormalities in DP and Dp to explain nephrotic edema. Studies have shown that hypoalbuminemia (and thus Dp) is not a likely cause of edema formation in most nephrotic patients owing to a parallel decrease in interstitial fluid albumin and an increase in interstitial fluid pressure, both of which serve to maintain edema driving forces constant. There is limited evidence suggesting that abnormalities in vascular permeability (Kf and s) may contribute to edema formation. A major advance in our understanding of the pathophysiologic basis of edema formation in the nephrotic syndrome is the discovery that proteinuria can cause primary renal sodium retention through ENaC activation. This mechanism is likely active in all patients with nephrotic syndrome, regardless of their intravascular volume status. Other causes of primary renal sodium retention include increased renal efferent sympathetic nerve activity, ANPase, and in the expression and activity of the Ne--le in the collecting duct in animal models. Fuhermore, excess serum vasopressin levels have been found to contribute to free water retention in some patients with the nephrotic syndrome."- Eric Siddall and Jai Radhakrishnan. The pathophysiology of edema formation in the nephrotic syndrome Nephrotic Syndrome Manifestations of Nephrotic Syndrome 1. Massive proteinuria, with the daily loss of 3.5 gm or more of proteinQ 2. Hypoalbuminemia, with plasma albumin levelsQ 3. Generalized edemaQ 4. Hyperlipidemia and lipiduriaQ Pathophysiology: Renal sodium retention and changes in variables of the Starling equation are fundamental to the pathophysiology of nephrotic edema. There is evidence for both intravascular volume expansion (overfilling) and intravascular volume depletion (under filling) in patients with nephrosis. Nephrotic Syndrome Mechanisms of Sodium Retention in the Nephrotic Syndrome Increased angiotensin 11-independent afferent and efferent aeriolar tone because of increased efferent sympathetic nerve activity. Tubular resistance to atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP). Increased number of open epithelial sodium channel (ENaC) channels in the coical collecting duct due to proteolytic activation of ENaC by plasmin. Increased number and activity of coical collecting duct Na/K ATPase channels Most impoant facts about Nephrotic syndrome The lipid appears in the urine either as free fat or as oval fat bodies, representing lipoprotein resorbed by tubular epithelial cells and then shed along with the degenerated cells. Most proteins are decreased in nephrotic syndrome except Fibrinogen and lipoproteins, due to increased synthesis. Proteins decreased Consequence Albumin Edema due to hypoalbuminemiaQ Transferrin Iron resistant microcytic anemiaQ Cholecalciferol binding proteins HypocalcemiaQ Thyroxin binding globulin Decreased thyroxin (Hypothyroid state)Q IgG Increased susceptibility of infectionsQ Renal vein thrombosis is paicularly common (up to 40%) in patients with nephrotic syndrome due to membranous glomerulopathy, memranoproliferative glomerulonephritis, and AmyloidosisQ. As a consequence of hypercoagulability and changes in proteins, patients can develop spontaneous peripheral aerial or venous thrombosis, renal vein thrombosis, and pulmonary embolismQ

Question: All of the following predominantly involve the white matter EXCEPT?
A. Alexander disease
B. Canavan disease
C. Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis
D. Adrenoleukodystrophy
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Gray matter diseases White matter diseases Clinical features Seizures, impaired vision, dementia Motor problems Examples Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis Biotinidase deficiency Pyridoxine deficiency Mitochondrial disorders Alexander disease Canavan disease Adrenoleukodystrophy Metachromatic leukodystrophy Krabbe disease

Question: Which of the following is a characteristic radiological finding in neonatal necrotizing enterocolitis –
A. Gas in the portal system
B. Gas in the intestinal wall
C. Pneumoperitonium
D. Air fluid levels
Correct Answer: B

Question: Most common type of TAPVC -
A. Supracardiac
B. Cardiac
C. Infracardiac
D. Mixed
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. is 'a' Supracardiac * Total anomalous pulmonary venous connection (TAPVC) is characterized by abnormal drainage of pulmonary veins into the right heart either by direct connection into the right atrium or into its tributaries.* According to the site or level of connection of the pulmonary veins to the systemic venous system TAPVC has been classified into four types# Type I (most common: 45%): Anomalous connection at supracardiac level (PV drains into left innominate vein or SVC).# Type II (25%): Anomalous connection at cardiac level (PV joins the coronary sinus or enter right atrium directly).# Type III (25%): Anomalous connection at infracardiac level (PV drain into portal vein).# Type IV (5%): Anomalous connection at multiple levels.* In supracardiac TAPVC the pulmonary veins join to form a single trunk (common pulmonary vein) which than drain through anomalous connection.

Question: Calorie requirement per day of a child weighing 15 kg would be -
A. 1150 kcal
B. 1250 kcal
C. 1450 kcal
D. 1550 kcal
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. is 'b' i.e., 1250 kcal

Question: A 7-day-old premature infant born at 26 weeks of gestation now has a grossly bloody stool, abdominal distention, and increasing oxygen requirements. choose the best initial diagnostic step in the evaluation of the patient's apparent GI hemorrhage.
A. Abdominal series
B. Fiberoptic endoscopy
C. Apt test
D. Routine stool culture
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC) is a life-threatening condition seen mostly in premature infants. Although the precise etiology is unknown, contributing factors include GI tract ischemia, impaired host immunity, the presence of bacterial or viral pathogens, and the presence of breast milk or formula in the gut. Findings include bloody stools, abdominal distension, hypoxia, acidosis, and emesis. The initial diagnostic test of choice is plain film radiographs. The characteristic finding in NEC is pneumatosis intestinalis; free air in the peritoneum may also be seen. Perforation is a surgical emergency, otherwise observation and antibiotics are indicated.

Question: Intra uterine growth retardation can be caused by all except -
A. Nicotine
B. Alcohol
C. Propranolol
D. Phenothiazine
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ans. is d i.e., Phenotiazines

Question: Maternal disomy of chromosome 15 is seen in
A. Prader - Willi syndrome
B. Klinefelter's syndrome
C. Angelman syndrome
D. Turner's syndrome
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Uniparental disomy occurs when both chromosomes of a pair or areas from 2 chromosome in any individual have been inherited from a single parent. Maternal uniparental disomy is seen in Leader -Willi syndrome. Paternal uniparental disomy is seen in Angelman syndrome . Reference: Nelson TB of pediatrics pg 412 19th edition.

Question: Capillary refill time in a child with shock is?
A. >1 second
B. >2 seconds
C. >3 seconds
D. >4 seconds
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Capillary refill is a simple test that assesses how quickly blood returns to the skin after pressure is applied.
It is carried out by applying pressure to the pink part of the nail bed of the thumb or big toe in a child and over the sternum or forehead in a young infant for 3 seconds.
The capillary refill time is the time from release of pressure to complete return of the pink colour. It should be less than 3 seconds.
If it is more than 3 seconds the child may be in shock. Lift the limb slightly above heart level to assess arteriolar capillary refill and not venous stasis.
This sign is reliable except when the room temperature is low, as the cold environment can cause a delayed capillary refill.
In such a situation check the pulses and decide about shock

Question: Which of the following agents is likely to cause cerebral calcification and hydrocephalus in a newborn whose mother has history of taking spiramycin but was not compliant with therapy?
A. Rubella
B. Toxoplasmosis
C. CMV
D. Herpes
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: b. Toxoplasmosis(Ref: Nelson's 20/e p 2814, Ghai 8/e p 574)Cerebral calcification with hydrocephalus in seen in congenital toxoplasmosis.

Question: Children can reach for objects by:
A. 4 months
B. 6 months
C. 8 months
D. 10 months
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans: A (4 months) Ref: Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics, 19th edition. Pg 27. Explanation: (See following table) Fine motor milestones MilestoneAverage age of attainment (in months)Developmental implicationsGrasps rattle3.5Object useReaches for objects4Visuomotor coordinationPalmar grasp gone4Voluntary releaseTransfers object hand to hand5.5Comparison of objectsThumb-finger grasp8Able to explore small objectsTurns pages of book12Increasing autonomy during book timeScribbles13Visuomotor coordinationBuilds tower of 2 cubes15Uses objects in combinationBuilds tower of 6 cubes22Requires visual, gross, and fine motor coordination

Question: Which among the following drug is not used in the
treatment of Tetralogy of Fallot?
A. β blocker
B. α agonists
C. Calcium channel blockers
D. Morphine
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Calcium channel blockers reduce systemic Vascular resistance which incsceases blood flow into Aorta and decreases blood to pulmonary vasculature. This adds to the pathology and worsens the condition.

Question: The ratio of ICF volume to Extracellular fluid volume reaches adult values at the age of
A. 1 year
B. 2 years
C. 3 years
D. 4 years
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Total body water is divided between 2 main compaments: intracellular fluid (ICF) and extracellular fluid (ECF). In the fetus and newborn, the ECF volume is larger than the ICF volume. The normal postnatal diuresis causes an immediate decrease in the ECF volume. This is followed by continued expansion of the ICF volume, which results from cellular growth. By 1year of age, the ratio of the ICF volume to the ECF volume approaches adult levels.Reference: Nelson Textbook of Paediatrics; 20th edition; Chapter 55; Electrolyte and Acid-Base Disorders

Question: True regarding febrile convulsion –
A. Carbamazepine is good drug to treat it
B. Patient with family h/o F.C. have increased incidence of recurrence
C. Longterm neurological deficits are common
D. Usually last for short while
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Types of febrile convulsions

Febrile convulsions may be of two types.


Simple benign
Atypical complex

1. Simple benign febrile convulsions

More common                                                           
Last less than 10 minutes      
Convulsions are generalized      
No post ictal neurological deficit   
Usually single seizure in the same day 
EEG is normal after a few days   

2. Complex, atypical febrile convulsions 

Less common 
More than one seizure in the same day
Last more than 15 minutes
Convulsions are focal             

Risk factors for recurrence

Positive family history
Atypical complex febrile convulsions
Neurodevelopmental retardation (e.g. cerebral palsy, mental retardation)
Early onset of febrile seizure (before 1 year)

Treatment of febrile seizure

Febrile convulsions are managed by prompt reduction of temperature with →

i) Antipyretics →  Paracetamole, Ibuprofen
ii) Hydrotherapy → Sponging

For seizures lasting > 5 minutes, anticonvulsants can be given -


Diazepam is the DOC
Phenobarbitone is an alternative

Question: Pseudoparalysis in an infant is suggestive of ?
A. Acute Rheumatic fever
B. Vitamin B6 deficiency
C. Vitamin E deficiency
D. Vitamin C deficiency
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ans. is 'd' i.e., Vit C deficiencyPseudoparalysis o A voluntary restriction of motion because of pain, incordination or other cause, but not due to actual muscular paralysis.Causes of pseudoparalysisScurvy (vitamin C deficiency) o OsteomyelitisSeptic (ahritis) o Congenital syphilis

Question: Neonatal Jaundice first time appears in the 2nd week not a cause is –
A. Galactossemia
B. Rh Incompatibility
C. Hypothyroidism
D. Breast milk Jaundice
Correct Answer: B

Question: Triplet repeats in Fragile X -syndrome is?
A. CTG
B. CGG
C. CAG
D. GAA
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: DISORDER TRIPLET REPEATS Fragile X syndrome CGG Friedreich ataxia GAA Myotonic dystrophy CTG Huntington disease CAG Ref: Nelson, 18th Edition, Pages 135, 499

Question: A 1.5 year old female is brought to the clinic with complaints of excessive enlargement of head, intolerance to feeds and severe malnourishment. MRI imaging was suggestive of a medulloblastoma causing obstructive hydrocephalus. Which of the following is an example of irrational manattem,-the patient?
A. Craniotomy and sub-total excision of the tumour. Surgeon leaves the layer of the tumour adherent with colliculus
B. First ventirculoperitoneal shunt was done
C. CCNU and vincristine were given as chemotherapy
D. Radiotherapy 35-40 Gy was given to the whole craniospinal axis
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ans. d. Radiotherapy 35-40 Gy was given to the whole craniospinal axis

Question: The age by which most of the normal babies know their gender is
A. 1 year
B. 2 years
C. 3 years
D. 4 years
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: <p>. Developmental milestones:- GROSS MOTOR DEVELOPMENT: 2 months: Holds head in plane of rest of the body when held in ventral suspension. In prone position in bed, the chin lifts momentarily. 3 months:lift head above the plane of the body. Head control stas by 3 months and fully developed by 5 months. 4 months:Remain on forearm suppo if put in prone position, lifting the upper pa of the body off the bed. 5 months: Rolls over. 6 months:sit in tripod fashion. 8 months: sits without suppo., crawling 9 months: Takes a few steps with one hand held. Pulls to standing and cruises holding on to furniture by 10 months. 10 months: creeps 12 months:creeps well, walk but falls, stand without suppo. 15 months: walks well, walks backward/ sideways pulling a toy. May crawl upstairs. 18 months: Runs, walks upstair with one hand held. Explores drawers 2 years: walk up and downstairs, jumps. 3 years : rides tricycle, alternate feet going upstairs. 4 years: hops on one foot, alternate feet going downstairs. 5 years:skips FINE MOTOR DEVELOPMENT:- 2 months- eyes follow objects to 180 deg. 3 months-Grasp reflex disappears and hand is open most of the time. 4 months- Bidextrous approach( reaching out for objects with both hands). 6 months- Unidextrous approach( Reach for an object with one hand). 8 months- radial grasp sta to develop. Turns to sound above the level of ear. 9 months- immature pincer grasp, probes with forefinger. 12 months-Unassisted pincer grasp. Releases object on request.Uses objects predominantly for playing, not for mouthing. Holds block on each hand and bang them together. 15 months- imitate scribbling , tower of two blocks 18 months- scribbles, tower of 3 blocks.turn pages of a book, 2-3 at a time. 2 years- tower of 6 blocks, veical and circular stroke. 3 years-Tower of 9 blocks, dressing and undressing with some help, can do buttoning. 4 years- copies cross, bridge with blocks 5 years- copies triangle, gate with blocks. SOCIAL AND ADAPTIVE MILESTONES: 2 months: social smile(smile after being talked to).watches mother when spoken to and may smile. 3 months:Recognizes mother, anticipates feeds. 4 months: Holds rattle when placed in hand and regards it . Laughs aloud. Excited at the sight of food. 6 months:recognizes strangers, stranger anxiety . Enjoy watching own image in mirror, shows displeasure when toy pulled off. 9 months:waves bye bye 12 months:comes when called, plays simple ball game.kisses the parent on request. Makes postural adjustments for dressing. 15 months:jargon, stas imitating mother. 18 months: copies parents in tasking, dry by day, calls mother when he wants potty, points to three pas of body on request. 2 years: ask for food, drink, toilet, pulls people to show toys. 3 years:shares toys, know fullname and gender, dry by night. 4 years:Plays cooperatively in a group, goes to toilet alone, washes face, brushes teeth. Role play . 5 years:helps in household task , dresses and undresses. LANGUAGE MILESTONES: 1 month: Ales to sound. 2 month:respond to sound by stale or quitening to a smooth voice. 3 months: babbles when spoken to. Makes sounds (ahh,coos, ) laughs. 4 months: laughs aloud. 6 months: monosyllables 9 months: understands spoken words, bisyllables. 12 months: 1-2 words with meaning. 18 months: vocabulary of 10 words. Can name one pa of body. 2 years: 3 word simple sentences 3 years:asks questions, knows full name and gender. 4 years: says songs or poem, tells story, knows three colours. 5 years: ask meaning of words. {Reference: GHAI Essential pediatrics, eighth edition}

Question: A mother calls you on the telephone and says that her 4-year-old son bit the hand of her 2-year-old son 2 days ago. The area around the injury has become red, indurated, and tender, and he has a temperature of 39.4degC (103degF). Which of the following is the most appropriate response?
A. Arrange for a plastic surgery consultation at the next available appointment.
B. Admit the child to the hospital immediately for surgical debridement and antibiotic treatment.
C. Prescribe penicillin over the telephone and have the mother apply warm soaks for 15 minutes four times a day.
D. Suggest purchase of bacitracin ointment to apply to the lesion three times a day.
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Human bites can pose a significant problem. They can become infected with oropharyngeal bacteria, including S aureus, Streptococcus viridans, Eikenella corrodens, and anaerobes. A patient with an infected human bite of the hand requires hospitalization for appropriate drainage procedures, Gram stain and culture of the exudate, vigorous cleaning, debridement, and appropriate antibiotics. The infected wound should be left open and allowed to heal by secondary intention (healing by granulation tissue rather than closure with sutures). Empiric antibiotic therapy for an infected bite should be penicillinase-resistant; amoxicillin-clavulanate orally, or ticarcillin-clavulanate or ampicillin-sulbactam IV are good choices. Antibiotic prophylaxis for noninfected bite wounds remains controversial, but some experts recommend prophylaxis for all significant human bites.

Question: Most common malignancy in children is –
A. Leukemia
B. Lymphoma
C. Wilm's tumor
D. Neuroblastoma
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Most common childhood tumor → Leukaemia
Most common childhood leukemia → ALL
Most common solid tumor of childhood → Brain tumor
Most common tumor in infancy → Neuroblastoma
Most common abdominal tumor in child → Neuroblastoma

Question: Compared with cow's milk, mother's milk has more?
A. Lactose
B. Vitamin D
C. Proteins
D. Fat
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Mother's milk has more lactose as compared to cow's milk.

Question: Early neonatal sepsis occurs within (hours) -
A. 8
B. 12
C. 36
D. 72
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ans. is 'd' i.e., 72 hours

Question: Cause of "bloody" vomitus in a neonate
A. Meckel's diveiculum
B. Intussusception
C. Malrotation
D. Cholecystitis
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Meckel&;s dieiculum may cause severe hemorrhage due to peptic ulceration. The blood is usually passed per rectum and is maroon in colour. it may cause bloody vomitus. Ref : BAILEY AND LOVE&;S SHO PRACTICE OF SURGERY,24 TH EDITION PG NO:1159

Question: Which is the commonest abdominal mass in neonate -
A. Wilm's tumor
B. Polycystic kidney
C. Neuroblastoma
D. Rhabdomyosarcoma
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. is 'c' i.e., Neuroblastoma The commonest intra-abdominal tumor in first two years of life Neuroblastoma The commonest intra-abdominal tumor between 2"d to 5th year of life - Wihn's tumor The commonest intra-abdominal tumor in children (no age specification) Neuroblastoma (Wilm's tumor is the second most common abdominal tumor in children) Remember: The commonest cause of abdominal mass in Newborn is : Multiple dysplastic kidneys (if neoplasm or tumor has not been mentioned when asking for the commonest intra-abdominal mass, the answer will be multiple dysplastic kidneys)

Question: A two-year-old child presents with persistent diarrhea, acidic stools and presence of one percent of reducing substance in the fresh stools. What is the most probable diagnosis?
A. Cystic fibrosis
B. Lactose intolerance
C. Rotavirus induced diarrhea
D. Intestinal tuberculosis
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Presence of acidic stools with reducing substance positive, suggests a diagnosis of lactose intolerance.

Question: Persistence of Moro's reflex is abnormal beyond the age of –
A. 3rd month
B. 4th month
C. 5th month
D. 6th month
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: "In a normal infant, the Moro's reflex begins to fade at three months of age and gradually disappears at 4-6 months.
When it persists beyond 6 months it indicates a delay in CNS development." ---------- Tachdjian
"Moro's reflex disappears by six months in a normal infant." ------------ Ghai

Question: True about VSD are all except -
A. Left to right shunt
B. Pansystolic mormor
C. Reverse spitting of S2
D. Left atrial hyperophy
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. is 'c' i.e., Reverse spliting of S2 Hemodynamics of VSD o A VSD results in shunting of oxygenated blood from left to right because left ventricle has more pressure than right Left to right shunt. o Blood flow from left to right ventricle due to high pressure gradient --> Pansystolic murmur and systolic thrill. o Because left ventricle stas contracting before Right ventricle, pansystolic murmur stas early --> Masking of SI. o This pressure gradient is maintained throughout the systole pansystolic murmur lasts long --> Masking of S2. o Towards the end of systole, the declining left ventricular pressure becomes lower than aoic Early closure of A2. o Left to right shunt occurs during systole at a time when the right ventricle is also contracting, therefore left to right shunt streams to pulmonary aery more or less directly --> No volume overload --> Right ventricle size remains normal. Increased blood flow through pulmonary valve --> Pulmonary ejection systolic murmur and delay & accentuated P2. o Early closure of A2 and delayed closure of P2 cause --> Widely split S2 (But this is usually masked by pansystolic murmur). o Larger volume reaches the left atrium -3 Left atrial hyperophy o Increased blood flow through mitral valve -3 Accentuated Si (But it is masked by pansystolic murmur) and delayed diastolic murmur. Note : o Ejection systolic murmur of pulmonary valve can not be separated from pansystolic murmur. o The effect of ejection systolic murmur is a selective transmission of pansystolic murmur to the upper left sternal border (pulmonary valve area) In this area ejection characteristic of this murmur can be recognized since it does not mask the aoic component of S2. For the same reason second hea sound (S2) can be heard in the pulmonary area where it is not masked by pansystolic murmur.

Question: All of the following may occur in Noonan syndrome except:
A. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
B. Cryptorchidism
C. Infertility in females
D. Autosomal dominant transmission
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: c. Infertility in females(Ref: Nelson's 20/e p 2744-2746, Ghai 8/e p 640-641)Turner syndromeNoonan syndromeKaryotype 45, XOKaryotype normalInfertileFertile but delayed pubertySeen only in femalesMay be seen in males or femalesIntelligence normalIntellectual disability present

Question: Least common cause of pericarditis/pericardial effusion in children:
A. Rheumatic fever
B. Sarcoidosis
C. Rheumatoid arthritis
D. SLE
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: b. Sarcoidosis(Ref: Nelson's 20/e p 2269-2271, Ghai 8/e p 433-443)Important causes of pericarditis/pericardial effusion in children:Infectious* Viral (Coxsackie virus B, EBV, Influenza, Adenovirus); Fungal (Histoplasmosis, Actinomycosis)* Bacterial (TB, Streptococcus, Pneumococcus, Staphylococcus, Meningococcus, Mycoplasma, Tularemia, Listeria, Leptospirosis)* Immune complex (Meningococcus, Hemophilus influenzae)* Parasitic (Toxoplasmosis, Echinococcosis) Connective tissue diseasesMetabolic-endocrineRheumatoid arthritisRheumatic feverSystemic lupus erythematosusSystemic sclerosisSarcoidosisWegener granulomatosisUremiaHypothyroidismChylopericardiumOut of the causes given in the options, Sarcoidosis is the least common.

Question: A child is taken to a pediatrician because his mother notices that his eyes appear very puffy. The mother said that the boy's eyes appeared normal two days ago, and pa of what caused her concern was that her child seemed to be rapidly becoming ill. On physical examination, the boy is noted to have generalized edema. No hypeension or jaundice is noted. Blood urea nitrogen and serum creatinine are within normal limits. A urine sample is collected, and the nurse notices that the top of the urine has a small amount of foam at the top. Urinalysis is negative for glucose, red cells, white cells, casts, crystals, and bacteria. A 24-hr-urine specimen is collected, which demonstrates proteinuria of 55 mg/h/m2. Which of the following is the most likely diagnosis?
A. Acute renal failure
B. Chronic renal failure
C. Lower urinary tract disease
D. Nephrotic syndrome
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Proteinuria greater than 40 mg/h/m2 in a child or 3.5 g/d/1.73 m2 in an adult produces nephrotic syndrome, which is characterized by generalized edema, often most noticeable in the face. The condition develops when large amounts of protein are spilled through the glomeruli into the duct system of the kidneys. In contrast, nephritic syndrome is accompanied by lower levels of proteinuria, together with microscopic or macroscopic hematuria (red cells and blood in urine). Acute and chronic renal failure are characterized by rising serum levels of BUN and creatinine. The findings seen do not suggest lower urinary tract disease, which is typically due to a lower urinary tract infection (which would show bacteria and white cells), calculi (crystals would likely be present), or tumor (which would show abnormal bladder epithelial cells).

Question: Which of the following is most common type of congential cardiac cyanotic anamoly?
A. Tetralogy of Fallot
B. TAPVC
C. Transposition of great vessels
D. Ebstein's Anamoly
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. is 'a' i.e., Tetralogy of Fallot o TOF is the commonest cyanotic congenital heart disease.

Question: Congenital hypertrophic pyloric stenosis usually presents –
A. Within 2 days after birth
B. Around 1 week after birth
C. Around 2 weeks after birth
D. Around 2 months after birth
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: The symptoms vomiting usually starts after 3 weeks of age but symptoms may develop as early as1st week of life and as late as 5 months of life. - Nelson

Congenital hypertrophic pyloric stenosis

Hypertrophic pyloric stenosis is the commonest surgical disorder of the stomach during infancy.
Pylorus is thickened and elongated and its lumen is narrowed due to hypertrophy of circular muscle fibers of pylorus.
More common in boys.
More common in infants of blood group 'B' and 'O'.
Associated congenital defects are → Tracheoesophageal fistula and hypoplasia or agenesis of inferior labial frenulum.
May be associated with Turner syndrome, Trisomy 18.
Symptoms are not present at birth.
The vomiting usually starts after 3 weeks of age.

Question: Lecithin/Sphingomyelin ratio is done to assess the maturity of:
A. Lung
B. Fetal circulation
C. Brain
D. Gonad
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ref: Cloherty's Manual of Newborn Care. 6th edition, Page 323Explanation:THE LECITHIN -SPHINGOMYELIN (L/S) RATIOAssessment of fetal lung maturity (FLM) prenatally by testing amniotic fluid obtained by amniocentesis.It is performed by thin-layer chromatography.The risk of RDS is very low if the L/S ratio is >2.Exceptions to L/S ratio >2 are:o Infants of diabetic mothers (IDMs)o Intrapartum asphyxiao Erythroblastosis fetalis.Other possible exceptions are intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR), abruptio placentae, preeclampsia and hydrops fetalis.Blood and meconium tend to elevate an immature L/S ratio and depress a mature L/S ratio.OTHER METHODSThe TDx-FLM 11 measures the surfactant- albumin ratio.Measured using fluorescent polarization technology.A value of >45 mg/g indicates maturity.Lamellar body counts in the amniotic fluid.Lamellar bodies are '"packages" of phospholipids produced by type II alveolar cells.A count of >50,000 lamellar bodies/microliter predicted lung maturity.

Question: All of the following are good prognostic factors for childhood Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia, except:
A. Hyperdiploidy
B. Female sex
C. Pre B cell ALL
D. t (12 : 21) translocation
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Hyperdiploidy, Female sex and pre B cell ALL are associated with good prognosis. t (12 : 21) translocation may be associated with a poor prognosis and is the single answer of exclusion. Ref: Pediatric Oncology: A Comprehensive Guide By Paul Imbach, Thomas R. Kuhne, Robe Arceci, 2004, page 23.

Question: An 8-hour-old term infant develops increased respiratory distress, hypothermia, and hypotension. A complete blood count (CBC) demonstrates a white blood cell (WBC) count of 2500/mL with 80% bands. The chest radiograph is shown below. Which of the following is the most likely diagnosis?
A. Congenital syphilis
B. Diaphragmatic hernia
C. Group B streptococcal pneumonia
D. Transient tachypnea of the newborn
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: (c) Source: (Hay et al, pp 1163-1166. Kliegman et al, pp 925-928. McMillan et al, pp 482-483, 501-506. Rudolph et al, pp 1097-1099.) The radiograph shows diffuse that infiltrates bilaterally; this can be seen with neonatal pneumonia or primary surfactant deficiency. The rapid onset of the symptoms, the low WBC count with left shift, and the depicted chest x-ray findings, however, are typical of a patient with group B streptococcus (GBS) pneumonia. Appropriate management would include rapid recognition of symptoms, cardiorespiratory support, and prompt institution of antibiotics. Despite these measures, mortality from this infection is not uncommon. The other infectious causes listed do not present so early, and the noninfectious causes listed do not cause elevations in the band count. GBS disease in the infant is decreasing in incidence with better prevention strategies in the perinatal period; early screening in pregnancy and treatment with antibiotics just prior to delivery to eliminate GBS colonization markedly decreases the risk to the infant. Congenital syphilis can cause pneumonia, but it is diagnosed at birth along with other features including hepatosplenomegaly, jaundice, rashes, hemolytic anemia, and others. Diaphragmatic hernia presents with early respiratory distress, but the diagnosis is confirmed clinically with bowel sounds heard in the chest and a radiograph that has loops of bowel located above the normal placement of the diaphragm. Transient tachypnea of the newborn (TTN) causes an increase in respiratory rate and occasionally a low oxygen requirement; the history is often positive for a cesarean delivery, and the radiograph shows retained fluid in the fissures. TTN does not cause temperature instability nor an abnormal CBC. Chlamydial pneumonia is not a condition that occurs in an 8-hour-old infant; it is generally a mild pneumonia that can develop in an exposed infant at several weeks of life.

Question: Most common cause of sho stature is:
A. Constitutional
B. Hypothyroidism
C. Growth hormone deficiency
D. Systemic illness
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. A: Constitutional The causes of sho stature can be divided into 3 broad categories: Chronic disease (including undernutrition genetic disorders) Familial sho stature Constitutional delay of growth and development (commoner) Endocrine diseases are rare causes of sho stature. The hallmark of endocrine disease is linear growth failure that occurs to a greater degree than weight loss.

Question: Infant with cystic fibrosis (CF) are likely to develop
A. Meconium ileus
B. Loose motions
C. Vomiting
D. Constpation
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: The common clinical presentations include meconium ileus in neonatal period,recurrent bronchiolitis in infancy and early childhod,recurrent respiratory tract infections ,chronic lung disease , bronchiectasis, steatorrhoea,with incresing age pancreatitis and azoospermia. Ref : Essential pediatrics,O.P.Ghai,7 th edition ,pg no:36

