Question: With which of the following receptors theophylline has an antagonistic interaction ?
A. Histamine receptors
B. Bradykinin receptors
C. Adenosine receptors
D. Imidazoline receptors
Correct Answer: C

Question: Gp2b3A inhibitors are all except -
A. Abciximab
B. Eptifibatide
C. Tirofiban
D. Prasugrel
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ans. is 'd' i.e., Prasugrel Glycoproteins lIb / IIIa inhibitorso The platelet glycoprotein mediates platelet aggregation via binding of adhesive proteins such as fibrinogen and Von Willebrand factor.o GP lib / Ilia inhibitors, inhibit platelet aggregation by blocking GPIIb / IlIa.o They are more complete inhibitors than either aspirin or clopidogrel / ticlopidinejj because they inhibit final pathway in platelet aggregation (whether it is mediated by ADP or TXA2), while aspirin blocks only TXA2 pathway and clopidogrel blocks only ADP pathway,o Drugs are -o In addition to inhibiting Gp lib / Ilia receptor, abciximab also inhibits ay(33 receptor (which binds vitronectin) and amb2 (a leukocyte integerin). This action is responsible for anti-inflammatory and antiproliferative properties of abciximab.

Question: Mark the true statement regarding use of Lithium in maniac-depressive psychosis?
A. Monotherapy for acute episodes
B. Monitoring of serum concentration is not useful for guiding dose adjustment
C. Can result in leucocytosis
D. Can result in hypehyroidism on long term use
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Lithium Use : Prophylaxis of mania alone, with sedatives in acute mania. Monitoring of S. concentration is significant to know the toxicity of drug S/E of Lithium Lithium use for a long time causes benign and reversible T-wave flattening Seizures Polyuria and compensatory polydipsia Dermatitis, folliculitis, vasculitis Weight gain

Question: The following drugs have significant drug interactions with digoxin except:
A. Cholestyramine
B. Thiazide diuretics
C. Quinidine
D. Amlodipine
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ref:KDT 6/e p499 Cholestyramine inhibits itestinal absorption of digoxin. Thiazides result in hypokalemia and thus make precipitate digitalis toxicity by pharmacodynamic interaction. Quinidine and verampil reduces the exceion of digoxin and does make precipitate toxicity (pharmacokinetic interaction)

Question: Schizophrenia is treated by
A. Anti depressants
B. Anti psychotics
C. Anti epileptics
D. Mood stabilizers
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. is 'b' i.e., Anti psychotics

Question: The drug used in petit mal seizures and has a narrow spectrum of antiepileptic activity is
A. Lamotrigine
B. Ethosuximide
C. Phenytoin
D. Primidone
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ethosuximide and valproate are the drugs of choice for absence seizures and are more effective than lamotrigineReference: Katzung Pharmacology; 12th edition; Page no: 418

Question: Schizophrenia is treated by:
A. Anti depressants
B. Anti psychotics
C. Anti epileptics
D. Mood stabilizers
Correct Answer: B

Question: Which of the following drugs can be administered by subcutaneous route?
A. Albuterol
B. Metaproterenol
C. Terbutaline
D. Pirbuterol
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: terbutaline can be given as s.c (0.25mg) in asthma.

Question: Which is an uricosuric drug-
A. Allopurinol
B. Probenecid
C. Indomethacin
D. Aspirin
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. is 'b' i.e., Probenecid Uricosuric drugs are probenacid, sulfinpyrazone and benzbromarone.

Question: DNA dependent RNA synthesis is inhibited by:
A. Rifampicin
B. Ethambutol
C. Colchicine
D. Chloromycetin
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Rifampicin

Question: About biotransformation not true ?
A. Active metabolite generation
B. Polar to less polar
C. Less polar to more polar
D. Generate active drug from prodrug
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. is 'b' i.e., Polar to less polar

Question: Pimozide belongs to class of:
A. Thiothixanthene
B. Phenothiazine
C. Butyrophenone
D. Diphenyl butyl piperidine
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Thioxanthenes are flupenthioxol. Butyrophenones are haloperidol, trifluperidol , penfluridol. Phenothiazines are Chlorpromazine, triflupromazine , thioridazine, flufenazine. Promazine belongs to the group of other of other hetero cyclics that is diphenyl butyl piperidine. Ref: KD Tripathi 8th ed.

Question: Which of the following drugs is antipseudomonal penicillin?
A. Cephalexin
B. Dicloxacillin
C. Piperacillin
D. Cloxacillin
Correct Answer: C

Question: Metoprolol is preferred over Propranolol as it: September 2010
A. Is more potent in blocking beta-1 receptors
B. Is more potent in blocking beta-2 receptors
C. Is more effective in suppressing essential tremors
D. Impairs exercise capacity
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. A: Is more potent in blocking beta-1 receptors Metoprolol is cardioselective beta blocker, more potent in blocking beta-1 than beta-2 adrenergic receptors.

Question: Which of the following aminoglycosides has the highest nephrotoxicity?
A. Paromomycin
B. Streptomycin
C. Amikacin
D. Neomycin
Correct Answer: D

Question: Polymorphic ventricular tachycardia can occur when terfenadine(antihistaminic):
A. Is coadministrator with azithromycin
B. Is coadministrator with fluconazole
C. Is given in higher doses
D. Reduces QT interval
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Torsades de pointes (polymorphic ventricular tachycardia) occurs when terfenadine is taken in higher doses or when hepatic metabolism is impaired by disease or by drugs which inhibit the cytochrome P450 responsible for metabolism of terfenadine. Drugs include erythromycin, clarithromycin, ketoconazole and itraconazole. Azithromycin and fluconazole that are excreted unchanged in the urine have not been associated with impaired metabolism of terfenadine. Terfenadine blocks the delayed rectifier potassium channels and prolongs cardiac repolarization and the QT interval.

Question: Acute Gouty ahritis is seen early in treatment following -
A. Probenecid
B. Allopurinol
C. Rasburicase
D. All of the above
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: All of the above Rapid lowering of urate level in chronic gout, by any means, may precipitate an attack of acute gout, probably by causing the dissolution of tophi. o It is therefore usual to give prophylactic suppressive treatment with indomethacine, colchicine or steroid cover during first 2 months of allopurinol or uricosurics. o Amongs the given options, allopurinol, probenecid and Rasburicase are the drugs that lower serum urate level. So, all three can precipitate acute gout. However, among these three, allopurinol is used most commonly therefore is the best answer here.

Question: Heparin is the commonly used anticoagulant in cardiac surgery. All of the following are true about heparin except-
A. Weakest acid found in living things
B. Most commercial preparations of heparin now utilize pig intestinal slimes
C. Act via Antithrombin activation
D. Produce thrombocytopenia
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. is 'a' Weakest acid found in living organism Heparin is a direct acting anticoagulant Chemical nature and preparationHeparin is a sulfated mucopolysaccharide which occurs in the secretory granules of mast cells.It is the strongest organic acid in the body and in the solution it carries an electronegative charge.It is prepared commercially from a variety of animal tissues (generally porcine intestinal mucosa or bovine lung).Mechanism of Action of HeparinHeparin acts by activating antithrombin which is a naturally occuring inhibitor of activated coagulation factors of intrinsic and common pathway. 'Adverse effects of HeparinBleedingHeparin induced thrombocytopeniaOccurs more commonly in heparin derived from bovine lung.Heparin induced thrombocytopenia should be suspected in whom the platelet count falls by 50% or more after starting heparin and usually occurs 5 or more days after starting therapy.In patients with heparin induced thrombocytopenia following drugs should be substituted.Danaparoid sodiumHirudinArgatrobanOsteoporosis - (most frequently seen in pregnancy)Hypersensitivity reactions & skin necrosis

Question: Which of the following drug is a long acting beta–2 agonist ?
A. Albuterol
B. Salmeterol
C. Pirbuterol
D. Orciprenaline
Correct Answer: B

Question: Quinine given to a patient of falciparum malaria caused sweating and palpitation, the likely cause is?
A. Cinchonism
B. Hyperglycemia
C. Hypoglycemia
D. Hypokalemia
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. is 'c' i.e., Hypoglycemia o Sweating and palpitations suggest hypoglycemia; which can occur due to quinine. Cinchonism is characterized by ringing in ears, nausea, vomiting, veigo, headache, mental confusion, difficulty in hearing and vision. Hypotension and cardiac arrhythmias develop on rapid i.v. injection.

Question: Which of the following drug crosses placenta
A. Heparin
B. Warfarin
C. Dicumarol
D. Nicoumalone
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: (Warfarin) (601-KDT6th)* WARFARIN - It crosses placenta and is secreted in milk however quantity of active form is generally insufficient to affect the suckling infants* HEPARIN - does not cross BBB or placenta**- It is the anticoagulant of choice during pregnancy*** Bleeding due to overdose is the most serious complication of heparin therapy** other side effects are thrombocytopenia, * alopecia, * osteoporosis*, hypersensitivity reactions.

Question: Which of the following drug acts against Pseudomonas -
A. Piperacillin
B. Methicillin
C. Nafcillin
D. Cloxacillin
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. is 'a' i.e., Piperacillin Drugs acting against Pseudomonas. o Penicillins- Piperacillin, Carbenicillin, Ticarcillin, Mezlocillin. o Cephalosporins - Ceftazidime, Cefoperazone, Cefepime. o Carbapenems- Imipenem, meropenem o Monobactams - Aztreonam. o Aminoglycosides - Tobramycin, Gentamycin, Amikacin. o Fluroquinolones - Ciprofloxacin, Levofloxacin, Norfloxacin.. o Other - Polymixin B, Colistin.

Question: Which of these following statements is wrong about Tacrolimus?
A. It is one of the macrolide antibiotic
B. It can be safely administered with any nephrotoxic drug
C. Glucose intolerance is a well known side effect
D. It is used as prophylaxis for transplant rejection
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: The side effects of Tacrolimus includes, nephro and hepato toxicity. It can also cause hypeension, tremors, seizure, diabetes mellitus and blurred vision. It should be better avoided with other hepato and renal toxicity drugs. Ref: Manzoor M. Khan (2008), Chapter 4 "Immunesupressive Agents", In the book, "Immunopharmacology", Springer Publications, USA, Page 91 ; Katzung, 9th Edition, Pages 941, 942

Question: Magaldrate is conveed by gastric acid to ?
A. Magnesium hydroxide
B. Magnesium hydroxide and calcium carbonate
C. Magnesium hydroxide and Aluminium hydroxide
D. Calcium carbonate and aluminium hydroxide
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. is `c' i.e., Magnesium hydroxide and Aluminium hydroxide Magaldrate: Magaldrateis a common antaciddrug that is used for the treatment of duodenal and gastric ulcers, esophagitis from gastroesophageal reflux. Magaldrate is a hydroxymagnesium aluminate complex that is conveed rapidly in gastric acid to Mg(OH), and Al(OH)3, which are absorbed poorly and thus provide a sustained antacid effect.

Question: Drug of choice for Treponema Pallidum is?
A. Penicillin G
B. Tetracycline
C. Azithromycin
D. Doxycycline
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: ANSWER: (A) Penicillin GREF: Microbiology, Volume 2; Volume 9, Part 2 edited by E. Edward Bittar, Neville Bittar p; 241See APPENDIX-65 for "SEXUALLY TRANSMITTED DISEASES""Parenteral penicillin G remains the treatment of choice for syphilis (Treponema pallidu and resistance to penicillin has not been reported"

Question: Drugs undergoing acetylation include all except:
A. Dapsone
B. Metoclopramide
C. Procainamide
D. INH
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. B. MetoclopramideAcetylation by N-acetyl transferases (NAT)e.g, S - SulfonamidesH - HydralazineI - IsoniazidP - Procainamide, PASD - DapsoneC - Clonazepam, Caffeine

Question: Hypeension is seen with all except-
A. Erythropoitin
B. Cyclosporine
C. NSAID
D. Levodopa
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ans. is d i.e., Levodopa Drug causing hypeension Cocaine MAO inhibitors Oral contraceptives Clonidine withdrawl Tricyclic antidepressants Cyclosporine Glucocoicoids Rofecoxib (NSAID) Erythropoietin Valdecoxib (NSAID) Sympathomimetics

Question: Beta 2 agonist used in rescue therapy in acute respiratory conditions are all except?
A. Formoterol
B. Salbutamol
C. Bambuterol
D. Ketotifen
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ans. is 'd' i.e., Ketotifen Formoterol, Salbutomol and bambuterol are p 2 agonists. o Ketotifen is a mast cell stabilizer.

Question: Which of the following drugs used to treat type II diabetes mellitus causes weight loss:
A. Metformin
B. Glimepiride
C. Repaglinide
D. Gliclazide
Correct Answer: A

Question: A Patient who is on antihypertensive drug develops a dry cough. Which of the following drug might be responsible for the condition:
A. Diuretics
B. ACE inhibitors
C. Calcium channel blockers
D. Beta blockers
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: The angiotensin-converting enzyme normally helps in conversion of angiotensin I to angiotensin II, which acts as a vasoconstrictor in case of hypovolemia.
In addition to that, ACE also helps in the breakdown of bradykinin.
When ACE inhibitors (captopril) are given, it inhibits ACE and in addition inhibits the breakdown of bradykinin also, which leads to accumulation of bradykinin level in the body.
This increased level of bradykinin presents with a Dry cough, rashes, urticaria and angioedema.

Question: A patient on lithium therapy was found to be hypeensive also. Which of the following antihypeensive drugs is contraindicated in a patient on lithium therapy in order to prevent toxicity?
A. Clonidine
B. Beta blockers
C. Calcium channel blockers
D. Diuretics
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Diuretics (thiazide, furosemide) by causing Na+ loss promote proximal tubular reabsorption of Na+ as well as Li+ --plasma levels of lithium rise. ref : KD Tripati 8th ed.

Question: Bacteriostatic antitubercular drug among the following is :
A. Isoniazid
B. Rifampicin
C. Streptomycin
D. Ethambutol
Correct Answer: D

Question: Which of the following does not cause Insulin release-
A. Rosiglitazone
B. Nateglinide
C. Glimipiride
D. Tobutamide
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. is 'a' i.e., Rosiglitazone o Oral hypoglycemic drugs may be divided into two groups. 1. Group 1 These drugs reduce plasma glucose by stimulating insulin production, therefore called insulin secretogogues. Hypoglycemia is a well known side effect. Examples are: i) Sulfonylureas: first generation (chlorpropamide, tobutamide); second generation (Glimipiride, glyburide, glipizide, gliclazide). ii) Megalitinnide/D-phenylalanine analogues: Nateglinide, Rapaglinide. 2. Group 2 These drugs reduce blood glucose without stimulating insulin production, therefore are insulin nonsecretogogues. These durgs do not cuase hypoglycemia when used alone and can cause hypoglycemia, only when used with other oral hypoglycemics. Examples are: i) Biguanides: Metformin, Phenformin ii) Thiazolidinediones: Rosiglitazone, Pioglitazone, Troglitazone. iii) alpha-glucosidase inhibitors: Acarbose, miglital.

Question: Which among the following NOT a pharmacological action of opioids
A. Cough suppression
B. Anti-emesis
C. Miosis
D. Truncal rigidity
Correct Answer: B

Question: Thalidomide can be used in all of the followingconditions except?
A. Behcet syndrome
B. HIV associated peripheral neuropathy
C. HIV associated mouth ulcers
D. Erythema nodosum leprosum
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: HIV associated peripheral neuropathy

Question: Uses of  α2 agonists are all EXCEPT:
A. To produce sedation
B. Glaucoma
C. Benign hyperplasia of prostate
D. Hypertension
Correct Answer: C

Question: Gastric irritation is least with following NSA1D: (PGI June 2008)
A. Diclofenac
B. Acetaminophen
C. Ibuprofen
D. Naproxen
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. B (Acetaminophen) "Gastric mucosal damageQ: Gastric pain, mucosal erosion/ ulceration and blood loss are produced by all MSAIDs to varying extents: relative gastric toxicity is a major consideration in the choice of MSAIDs. Paracetamol", a very weak inhibitor of COX is practically free of gastric toxicity and selective (misoprosto) administered concurrently with NSAIDsanatgonise their gastric toxicity"- KDT 6th/186Aspirin is acetylsalicylic acid KDT 6th/187

Question: Redistribution phenomenon is seen in:
A. Halothane
B. Ether
C. Thiopentone
D. All
Correct Answer: C

Question: Therapeutic blood range of theophylline in microgram per L is:
A. 0-5
B. 10-May
C. 15-May
D. 20-May
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Theophylline is having a narrow margin of safety so therapeutic drug monitoring is essential If levels increase more than 20mg/L- side effects occurs ESSENTIAL OF MEDICAL PHARMACOLOGY SEVENTH EDITION KD TRIPATHI PGNO.226

Question: Triamterene causes
A. Better glucose tolerance
B. Muscle cramps
C. Decrease in urea level
D. Hypokalemia
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Inhibitors of renal epithelial Na+ channel Include Triamterene and amiloride. Triamterene:- It is incompletely absorbed orally, paly bound to plasma proteins, largely metabolized in liver to an active metabolite and excreted in urine. Plasma t 1/2 is 4 hours, effect of a single dose lasts 6-8 hours. Side effects:- consist of nausea, dizziness, muscle cramps and rise in blood urea. Impaired glucose tolerance and photosensitivity are repoed, but urate level is not increased. Ref:- kd tripathi; pg num:-590

Question: Mucositis is caused by:
A. 5-Fluorouracil
B. Methotrexate
C. Paclitaxel
D. Cisplatin
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Flurouracil is used mainly for solid malignancies,i.e colon, rectum, pancreas, liver, urinary bladder, head, and neck. Genetic deficiency of dihydropyridine dehydrogenase(DPD) leads to Fluorouracil toxicity. Major toxicity is myelosuppression, mucositis, diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, peripheral neuropathy (hand-foot syndrome)also occurs. Other given drugs are anti-cancerous drugs without mucositis. ESSENTIALS OF MEDICAL PHARMACOLOGY-SEVENTH EDITION-K.D TRIPATHI Page; 864

Question: A 9-year-old boy diagnosed as uncomplicated pulmonary tuberculosis. He is put on isoniazid, rifampin, and ethambutol at home after initial treatment given at hospital. Which is accurate statement for this scenario?
A. His 3-year-old sibling should receive INH prophylaxis
B. A baseline test of auditory function test is essential before drug treatment is initiated
C. Polyahralgia is a potential adverse effect of the drugs the boy is taking
D. His mother, who takes care of him, does not need INH prophylaxis
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Prophylaxis with INH is always advisable for family members and close contacts in active cases. None of the drugs prescribed is associated with nephrotoxicity. Polyahralgia is a side effect of pyrazinamide that's not given in this case. Routine LFTs should be done in younger patients if INH plus rifampin given in higher doses. Ocular Function test should be done before staing ethambutol.

Question: All of the following statements about Heparin are true, except:
A. Causes Alopecia
B. Non Teratogenic
C. Releases Lipoprotein Lipase
D. Causes Hypokalemia
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Heparin inhibits the production of aldosterone. It thus lead to severe Hyperkalemia and not hypokalemia as mentioned in the choice above. Ref: Harrison's Textbook of Internal Medicine, 16th edition, Page 1261; K D Tripathi Textbook of Pharmacology, 5th Edition, Pages 561-63

Question: If a drug is active against the pre-erythrocytic stage of the malarial parasite it will be useful as a:
A. Suppressive prophylactic
B. Causal prophylactic
C. Clinical curative
D. Radical curative
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: If a drug is active against the pre-erythrocytic stage of the malarial parasite it will be useful as a Causal prophylactic. Stage killed Clinical Use Pre-erythrocytic Causal Prophylaxis Erythrocytic Clinical cure Suppressive Prophylaxis Exo-erythrocytic Radical cure Gametocytic Prevention of transmission

Question: Blockade of nerve conduction by a local anaesthetic is characterized by -
A. Greater potential to block a resting nerve as compared to a stimulated nerve
B. Need to cross the cell membrane to produce the block
C. Large myelinated fibers are blocked before small myelinated fibers
D. Cause consistant change of resting membrane potential
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. is 'b' i.e., Need to cross the cell membrane to produce the block Penetration of axonal membrane by L.A. o Local anaesthetics are weak bases and are used in the form of acid salts (usually HCL). o They penetrate the axoplasmic membrane in unionized form (unionize molecules are lipid soluble and diffusible). o Inside axon they becomes ionized and act from inside of Na+ channel. Sodium bicarbonate speeds the onset of action of LAs by increasing the unionized form (weak bases are unionized at alkaline pH). About other option Stimulated fibers are blocked rapidly (not resting fibers) Smaller fibers are more sensitive than larger o LA does not effect resting membrane potential as it does not block the Na+ channel in resting state (see above explanantion). LA inhibits depolarization as it prolonges the inactive state and prolongs the refractory period.

Question: Which of the following is a first-generation Cephalosporin used for surgical prophylaxis?
A. Ceftriaxone
B. Cefoxitin
C. Cefazolin
D. Cefepime
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: First-Generation Cephalosporins: include - Cefazolin, Cephalexin, Cephradine, Cefadroxil, Cephalothin and Cephapirin Cefazolin is good for skin preparation as it is active against skin infections from S.pyogenes and MRSA. It is administered Intramuscular or Intravenous (i.e Parenteral drug).It is a drug of choice for surgical prophylaxis.Cefazolin does not penetrate the CNS and cannot be used to treat meningitis. Cefazolin is better tolerated than Antistaphylococcal Penicillins, and it has been shown to be effective for serious Staphylococcal infections e.g Bacteremia. Oral First generation drugs may be used for the treatment of urinary tract infections and Staphylococcal or Streptococcal infections, including cellulitis or soft tissue abscess.

Question: Patient on treatment on carbidopa + levodopa for 10 yrs now has weaning off effect. What should be added to restore action -
A. Tolcapone
B. Amantadine
C. Rasagiline
D. Benzhexol
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. is 'a' i.e., Tolcapone o Both entacapone and tolcapone enhance and prolong the therapeutic effect of levodopa-carbidopa in advanced and fluctuating parkinsons disease. They may be used to smoothen off the 'wearing off', increase 'on' time and decrease loff' time, improve activities of daily living and allow levodopa dose to be reduced,o Treatment of on - off phenomenon in parkinsonism:Add one or two additional doses of levodopa.Continuous delivery of levodopa in duodenum.Avoid proteins in diet.Controlled release oral levodopa.'' peripheral decarboxylase inhibitor.Use of subcutaneous apomorphine.

Question: A 52 year old male presents to his physician with a chief complaint of a substantial increase in the size of his breasts over the past few months. Three months ago he was diagnosed with hypeension, and placed on antihypeensive medication. Which of the following medications was most likely prescribed?
A. Captopril
B. Furosemide
C. Hydrochlorothiazide
D. Spironolactone
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: All of the medications listed as answer choices can be effectively used in the treatment of hypeension. Spironolactone is a "potassium-sparing" diuretic that exes its action primarily as a competitive inhibitor of aldosterone receptors in the distal nephron. One of the repoed side effects of spironolactone is gynecomastia. None of the other choices have gynecomastia as a side effect. Captopril is an angiotensin-conveing enzyme (ACE) inhibitor that causes a decrease in plasma angiotensin II concentration, resulting in decreased aldosterone secretion. Furosemide is a "loop diuretic" that acts by inhibiting the reabsorption of sodium and chloride ions in the loop of Henle as well as in the proximal and distal renal tubules. Hydrochlorothiazide is a "thiazide diuretic" that inhibits the reabsorption of sodium and chloride ions in the distal renal tubules. Ref: Snyder P.J. (2011). Chapter 41. Androgens. In B.C. Knollmann (Ed), Goodman & Gilman's The Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics, 12e.

Question: The drug of choice in digitalis induced ventricular arrhythmias is:
A. I.V. Lignocaine
B. Phenytoin
C. Quinidine
D. Procainamide
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: (IV Lignocaine): Ref: 463-KDT (514-KDT 6th)Treatment of digitalis induced ventricular arrhythmias* Lignocaine IV repeated as required is the drug of choice. It suppresses the excessive automaticity but does not accentuate A V block* Phenytoin is also useful but not preffered now (sudden death occurs)* Quinidine and procainamide are contraindicated.

Question: A 70 - year- old man was administered penicilline intravenously. Within 5 minutes, he developed genralised urticaria, swelling of lips, hypotension and bronchospasm. The first choice of treatment is to administer:
A. chlorphenitramine inj.
B. Epinephrine inj.
C. High dose hydrocortisone tablet
D. nebulised salbutamol
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. is 'b' i.e. epinephrine injection Urticaria, swelling of lips, hypotension and bronchospasm within 5 minutes of i.v penicillin suggests anaphylactic reaction. It's a major problem with the use of penicillin.The t/t of choice for anaphylaxis is i.v epinephrine.

Question: Rituximab is a monoclonal antibody used for treatment of:-
A. Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma
B. Gastrointestinal Stromal Tumors
C. Chronic Myeloid Leukemia
D. Acute Myeloid Leukemia
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Rituximab is a monoclonal antibody against CD20. It is used for treatment of: Non-Hodgkin lymphoma Chronic lymphoid leukemia Rheumatoid ahritis SLE Auto-immune hemolytic anemia Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura

Question: Which is NOT a third generation Cephalosporin
A. Ceftriaxone
B. Cefotaxime
C. Ceftizoxime
D. Cefuroxime
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ans. is 'd' i.e., Cefuroxime Third generation cephalosporins include Parenteral OralCefotaxime - CefiximeCeftizoxime - Cefpodoxime proxetilCeftriaxone - CefdinirCeftazidime - Ceftibuten Cefoperazone Also knowFourth generation cephalosporinsCefepimeCefaparole

Question: Which of the following about phenytoin is true ?
A. It follows zero order kinetics
B. Not an hepatic enzyme inducer
C. It is excreted unchanged in urine
D. It is not teratogenic
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. is 'a' i.e., It follows zero order kinetics Phenytoin is metabolized in liver by hydroxylation and glucuranide conjugation (option 'c' is incorrect) o This drug follows saturation kinetics (kinetics changes from first order to zero order within therapeutic concentrations) Phenytoin is an enzyme inducer and induces the metabolism of many drugs. Phenytoin is a known teratogenic and produces fetal hydantoin syndrome.

Question: Preferred fluoroquinolone against m. leprae is -
A. Ofloxacin
B. Pefloxacin
C. Ciprofloxacin
D. Moxifloxacin
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. is 'a' i.e., Ofloxacin Drugs acting on M. leprae* Established agents used to treat leprosy include dapsone (50-100 mg/d), clofazimine (50-100 mg/d, 100 mg three times weekly, or 300 mg monthly), and rifampin (600 mg daily or monthly. Of these drugs, only rifampin is bactericidal.* The sulfones (folate antagonists), the foremost of which is dapsone, were the first antimicrobial agents found to be effective for the treatment of leprosy and are still the mainstay of therapy.* Other antimicrobial agents active against M. leprae in animal models and at the usual daily doses used in clinical trials include ethionamide/prothionamide; the aminoglycosides streptomycin, kanamycin, and amikacin (but not gentamicin or tobramycin); minocycline; clarithromycin; and several fluoroquinolones, particularly preferred is ofloxacin.* Next to rifampin, minocycline, clarithromycin, and ofloxacin appear to be most bactericidal for M. leprae, but these drugs have not been used extensively in leprosy control programs. Most recently, rifapentine and moxifloxacin have been found to be especially potent against M. leprae in mice. In a clinical trial in lepromatous leprosy, moxifloxacin was profoundly bactericidal, matched in potency only by rifampin.

Question: Local anaesthetics :
A. Block the release of neurotransmitters
B. Block the influx of sodium into the cell
C. Increase the release of inhibitory neurotransmitters
D. Inhibit the efflux of sodium from neurons
Correct Answer: B

Question: Elaboration of inactivating enzymes are the impoant mechanism of drug resistance among all of these antibiotics except
A. Quinolone
B. Pencillin
C. Chloramphenicol
D. Aminoglycoside
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Refer KDT 6/e p688 Resistance to fluoroquinolone is mediated by mutation in DNA gyrase

Question: Dobutamine differs from dopamine in that
A. It has good blood-brain barrier penetrability
B. It causes pronounced tachycardia
C. It does not activate adrenergic b receptors
D. It does not activate peripheral dopaminergic receptors
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Dopamine (DA):- It is a dopaminergic (D1 and D2) as well as adrenergic a and b1 (but not b2) agonist. Dobutamine:- A derivative of DA, but not a D1 or D2 receptor agonist. Though it acts on both a and b adrenergic receptors. Ref:- kd tripathi; pg num:-134

Question: Mrs Shikha, 50-years-old woman is diagnosed with cervical cancer. Which lymph node group would be the first involved in metastatic spread of this disease beyond the cervix and uterus? NOT RELATED -anatomy
A. Common iliac nodes
B. Parametrial nodes
C. External iliac node
D. Paracervical or ureteral nodes
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: .

Question: Which is True about dobutamine?
A. Dobutamine decreases peripheral resistance
B. Acts on D1 and D2 receptors
C. Decrease kidney circulation
D. Has no effect on coronary circulation
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ref: HL Sharma 3rd ed pg no: 177 Dobutamine is a derivative of dopamine and is a selective beta1 agonist. It causes an increase in the force of contraction without a significant increase in hea rate. It also produces some vasodilatation by stimulating the beta 2 receptors. It doesn't decrease kidney circulation.

Question: Drug used in cancer chemotherapy induced vomiting is?
A. Aprepitant
B. Dexamethasone
C. Ondansetrin
D. All of the above
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ondansetron is drug of choice for chemotherapy induced vomiting Dexamethasone,lorazepam and aprepitant are also used for chemotharapy induced vomiting.( ref KDT 7/e p876)

Question: Anticoagulant of choice for prophylaxis of venous thromboembolism in patient with cancer surgery is:-
A. Heparin sulfate
B. Protamine sulfate
C. Low molecular weight heparin
D. Warfarin
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Venous Thromboembolism- precipitating factor -estrogen in females PREVENTION OF Venous Thromboembolism AMONG HOSPITALIZED PATIENTS Condition Prophylaxis High risk non - ohopedic surgery Unfractionated heparin Low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) Cancer surgery(associated thromboembolism ) LMWH Major ohopedic surgery Warfarin LMWH Aspirin Factor Xa inhibitors (Apixaban) Dabigatran Medically ill patients during hospitalization Unfractionated heparin LMWH Medically ill patients after hospitalization Betrixaban

Question: Ethanol is given in methyl alcohol poisoning because:
A. It inhibit alcohol dehydrogenase
B. It inhibit aldehyde synthetase
C. It binds 100 times stronger than methanol
D. None
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ethanol is preferentially metabolised by alcohol dehydrogenase over methanol.At a concenteration 100mg/DL in blood it saturates alcohol dehydrogenase over methanol &retads methanol metabolism. This reduces formation of formaldehyde & formic acid. Ref KD Tripathi 8th ed.

Question: The following are adverse effects of SSRIs except
A. Weight changes
B. Diarrhoea
C. Delayed ejaculation
D. Galactorrhea
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Galactorrhea is a side effect of hyperprolactinemia is not usually seen with SSRIs Side effects of SSRIs include weight changes, delayed ejaculation,diarrhoea,bleeding , discontinuation syndrome,insomnia. Ref: KD Tripathi 8th ed.

Question: Which of the following is associated with cough?
A. Lisinopril
B. Propranolol
C. Verapamil
D. Sodium nitroprusside
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans: a (Lisinopril) Ref: KDT, 6th ed, p. 484* Cough is a side effect of ACE-1.* Bradykinin and substance P seem to be responsible for the cough. Thromboxane antagonism, aspirin, and iron supplementation reduce cough induced by ACE inhibitors. Once ACE inhibitors are stopped, the cough disappears, usually within 4 days.Important points on ACE inhibitorsEnalapril, fosinopril, perindopril, and ramipril are prodrags.Captopril & lisinopril does not require hydrolysis to become active ACE inhibitorEnalapril is converted in the body into enalaprilat. Enalaprilat differs from captopril in that it is an analog of a tripeptide rather than a dipeptide.Adverse effects of ACE inhibitors are cough; hypotension; hyperkalaemia; acute renal failure in patients with bilateral renal artery stenosis, stenosis of the artery to a single remaining kidney, heart failure, or volume depletion owing to diarrhea or diuretics; teratogenicity; skin rash; proteinuria, angioedema and dysguesia.

Question: Which of the following is not an action of epinephrine when administered intravenously in a high dose?
A. Increases liver glycogenolysis
B. Causes broachiolar constriction
C. Evokes extrasystoles in the heart
D. Produces restlessness and anxiety
Correct Answer: B

Question: Daclizumab acts through ?
A. cGMP activation
B. Adenylcyclase inhibition
C. IL 2 receptor blocker
D. IL10 receptor blocker
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. is 'c' i.e., IL 2 receptor blocker Monoclonal antibodies (daclizumab and basiliximab) that block the interleukin 2 receptor and are used in prevention of graft rejection as immunosuppresant.

Question: All of the following are true regarding diuretics except:-
A. Spironolactone is a potassium sparing drug
B. Mannitol is an osmotic diuretic
C. Thiazides act by inhibiting sodium-potassium chloride co-transpo
D. Acetazolamide inhibits carbonic anhydrase enzyme
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Name Site of action Example Mechanism Loop diuretics Thick ascending limb of Loop of Henle Furosemide Torsemide Na-K-2Cl sympoer inhibition Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors PCT Acetazolamide Dorzolamide Brinzolamide Carbonic anhydrase inhibition Thiazides DCT Hydrochlohiazide Chlohalidone Na-Cl sympoer inhibition Osmotic diuretics Non-specific Mannitol By osmotic effect Epithelial sodium channel blockers Collecting duct Amiloride Triamterene eNa channel blockade Aldosterone antagonists Collecting duct Spironolactone Epleronone Antagonism of aldosterone receptors

Question: A 44-year-old businessman presents to a physician because of a markedly inflammed and painful right great toe. He states that he just returned from a convention, and had noticed increasing pain in his right foot during his flight back home. Physical examination is remarkable for swelling and erythema of the right great toe as well as small nodules on the patient's external ear. Aspiration of the metatarsal-phalangeal joint of the affected toe demonstrates needle-shaped negatively birefringent crystals. Which of the following agents would provide the most immediate relief for this patient?
A. Allopurinol
B. Aspirin
C. Colchicine
D. Probenecid
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: The patient has gout, which is due to precipitation of monosodium urate crystals in joint spaces (notably the great toe) and soft tissues (causing tophi, which are often found on the external ears). Colchicine reduces the inflammation caused by the urate crystals by inhibiting leukocyte migration and phagocytosis secondary to an effect on microtubule assembly. Allopurinol and its metabolite, oxypurinol, inhibit xanthine oxidase, the enzyme that forms uric acid from hypoxanthine. Therapy with this agent should be begun 1-2 weeks after the acute attack has subsided. Aspirin competes with uric acid for tubular secretion, thereby decreasing urinary urate excretion and raising serum uric acid levels. At high doses (more than 2 gm daily) aspirin is a uricosuric. Probenecid and sulfinpyrazone are uricosuric agents, increasing the urinary excretion of uric acid, hence decreasing serum levels of the substance. Therapy with these agents should be begun 1-2 weeks after the acute attack has subsided.

Question: Platelet aggregation is blocked by aspirin due to its action on:
A. Prostacyclin
B. PGF 2 alpha
C. Thromboxane A2
D. Phospholipase C
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. c. Thromboxane A2 (Ref: Goodman Gilman 12/e p868; Katzung 12/e p638; KDT 7/e p195, 6/e p186, 609)Aspirin causes several different effects in the body, mainly the reduction of inflammation, analgesia, the prevention of clotting, and the reduction of fever. Much of this is believed to be due to decreased production of prostaglandins and TXA2."In platelets, the major cyclooxygenase product is TxA2 (thromboxane A 2), a labile inducer of platelet aggregation and a potent vasoconstrictor. Aspirin blocks production of TxA2 by acetylating a serine residue near the active site of platelet cyclooxygenase-1 (COX-1), the enzyme that produces the cyclic endoperoxide precursor of TxA2. Because platelets do not synthesize new proteins, the action of aspirin on platelet COX-1 is permanent, lasting for the life of the platelet (7-10 days). Thus. repeated doses of aspirin produce a cumulative effect on platelet function. "-- Goodman Gilman 12/e p868Drugs affecting Thromboxane A2COX inhibitors like aspirin decreases the synthesis of TXA2QDaltroban & Sultroban are TXA2 receptor antagonistsQDazoxihen inhibits the enzyme thromboxane synthetaseQAspirinAspirin is now rarely used as an anti-inflammatory medication and used for its anti-platelet effectsQ (doses of 81-325 mg once daily).Mechanisms of Action:In platelets, the major cyclooxygenase product is TxA2, a labile inducer of platelet aggregation & a potent vasoconstrictorQ.Aspirin blocks production of TxA2 by acetylating a serine residue near active site of platelet cyclooxygenase-1 (COX-1), enzyme that produces cyclic endoperoxide precursor of TxA2Q.Because platelets do not synthesize new proteins, the action of aspirin on platelet COX-1 is permanent, lasting for the life of the platelet (7-10 days)Q.Clinical UsesAspirin decreases the incidence of transient ischemic attacks, unstable angina, coronary artery thrombosis with myocardial infarction & thrombosis after coronary artery bypass graftingQ.Epidemiologic studies suggest that long-term use of aspirin at low- dosage is associated with a lower Incidence of colon cancer, possibly- related to its COX-Inhibiting effectsQ.Adverse EffectsGastric upset (intolerance) and gastric & duodenal ulcersQ.Hepatotoxicity, asthma, rashes, GI bleeding & renal toxicity rarely if ever occur at antithrombotic doses.Antiplatelet action of aspirin contraindicates its use by patients with hemophiliaQ.

Question: Mechanism of action of ciprofloxacin in gram negative bacteria:-
A. Inhibition of mycolic acid
B. Inhibition of topoisomerase IV
C. Inhibition of DNA gyrase
D. Inhibition of helicase
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: MECHANISM OF FLUOROQUINOLONES (FQ) In gram negative bacteria, FQ inhibit DNA gyrase by binding to its A subunit and interfere with cutting and resealing function. In gram positive bacteria, FQ inhibit similar enzyme DNA topoisomerase IV.

Question: High anticholinergic propey is present in the following antihistaminic agent
A. Astemizole
B. Diphenhydramine
C. Terfenadine
D. Fexofenadine
Correct Answer: B

Question: Folic acid metabolism is inhibited by :  a) Sulfonamides b) Methotrexate c) Nitrous oxide d) Trimethoprim e) 5–Flucytosine
A. acd
B. abd
C. bde
D. ace
Correct Answer: B

Question: Treatment of acute asthma include all except-
A. Prednisolone
B. Salbutamol
C. Salmeterol
D. Ipratropium bromide
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. is 'c' i.e., Salmeterol o Long acting Beta - 2 agonists have no role in acute attack of asthma. They are useful in persistent asthma.

Question: A volunteer Ram will receive a new drug in a phase I clinical trial. The clearance and the volume of distribution of the drug in Ram are 1.386 I/hr and 80 L respectively. The half life of the drug in him would be approximately:
A. 83 hr
B. 77 hr
C. 40 hr
D. 0.02 hr
Correct Answer: C

Question: All of the following can be used to treat alcohol dependence except
A. Naltrexone
B. Acamprosate
C. Flumazenil
D. Disulfiram
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Naltrexone is orally effective opiod antagonist useful in alcohol withdrawal. Acamprosate an NMDA receptor antagonist is useful in preventing relapse. Disulfiram is used to make alcohol consumption an unpleasant experience. It inhibit the enzyme aldehyde dehydrogenase. Ref: KD Tripathi 8th ed.

Question: All of the following side effects are produced by Cisplatin except
A. Ototoxicity
B. Nephrotoxicity
C. Coasting effect
D. Pulmonary fibrosis
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Cisplatin can cause ototoxicity, nephrotoxicity, coasting effect (peripheral neuropathy) and severe nausea and vomiting.
Pulmonary fibrosis is seen with Bleomycin and Busulfan.

Question: All statements are true except remifentanil is true except
A. Useful for sho painful procedures
B. Metabolized by plasma esterases
C. Equipotent as fentanyl
D. Long acting anesthetic
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Refer Goodman Gilman 11/e p 572 Remifentanil is shoest acting opioid due to its metabolism by plasma esterases Due to its sho duration of action, it is indicated for sho term painful procedures Intravenous bolus dosing is not practical Potency is equal to fentanyl

Question: Chronotrophic means: March 2010
A. Drugs affecting the contractility of hea
B. Drugs affecting hea rate
C. Drugs affecting the myocardial blood flow
D. Drugs affecting diastolic relaxation
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. B: Drugs affecting hea rate Chronotropic effects are those drugs that change the hea rate. Chronotropic drugs may change the hea rate by affecting the nerves controlling the hea, or by changing the rhythm produced by the sinoatrial node. Positive chronotropes increase hea rate; negative chronotropes decrease hea rate. A dromotrope affects Atrioventricular node (AV node) conduction. A positive dromotrope increases AV nodal conduction, and a negative dromotrope decreases AV nodal conduction. A lusitrope is an agent that affects diastolic relaxation. Inotropes affects contractility of the hea. Chronotropic variables in systolic myocardial performance can be split left and right. Left sided systolic chronotropy can be appreciated as Aoic Valve open to close time. Right sided variables are represented by Pulmonary valve open to close time. Inveed as diastolic chronotropy, the variables are aoic valve close to open and pulmonic close to open time.

Question: Epinephrine added to a solution of lignocaine for a peripheral nerve block will :
A. Increase risk of convulsions
B. Increase the duration of action of the local anesthetic
C. Both (a) and (b)
D. None of these
Correct Answer: B

Question: ACE inhibitor contraindicated in which of the following condition:
A. Bilateral renal artery stenosis
B. Chronic kidney disease
C. Post myocardial infarction
D. Diabetes mellitus
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. (a) Bilateral renal artery stenosisRef. Katzung's pharmacology 10th ed. Ch 11* ACEI inhibits the converting enzyme peptidyl dipeptidase that hydrolyzes angiotensin I to angiotensin II and (under the name plasma kininase) inactivates bradykinin, a potent vasodilator, which works at least in part by stimulating release of nitric oxide and prostacyclin.* Drugs under this class are: Captopril, Enalapril, Lisinopril, Benazepril, fosinopril, moexipril, perindopril, quinapril, ramipril, and trandolapril.* ACE inhibitors have a particularly useful role in treating patients with chronic kidney disease because they diminish proteinuria and stabilize renal function (even in the absence of lowering of blood pressure).* ACE inhibitors have also proved to be extremely useful in the treatment of heart failure, and after myocardial infarction, and* There is recent evidence that ACE inhibitors reduce the incidence of diabetes in patients with high cardiovascular risk.

Question: Pentamidine therapy causes all, EXCEPT ?
A. Upper lobe infiltrates
B. Cavitation
C. Extrathoracic manifestation
D. None
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ans. is None o Patients who receive aerosolized pentamidine have increased frequency of upper lobe infiltrates. Pneumothorax also occurs. o Risk factor for extrapulmonary spread in patients with HIV is the administration of aerosolized pentamidine. o In patients with PCP who have been receiving aerosolized pentamidine for prophylaxis, one may see an X-ray picture of upper lobe cavitary disease.

Question: Depression is not a side effect of
A. Propanolol
B. Oral contraceptives
C. Reserpine
D. Flupenthixol
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Answer is option4, flupenthisol. The antidepressive and anxiolytic efficacy of flupenthixol has been investigated in numerous controlled and open trials involving patients with endogenous, reactive as well as senile depressions. When administered at a mean daily single or multiple dose of 1-2 mg, flupenthixol proved to be a very effective and well-tolerated antidepressant. As opposed to some of the currently available antidepressants, flupenthixol has a rapid onset of action which is often displayed within the first 2-3 days following its application. Ref:

Question: Drug of choice for pregnant female suspected of having a baby with congenital adrenal hyperplasia
A. Dexamethasone
B. Betamethasone
C. Hydrocoisone
D. Prednisolone
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Refer Goodman Gilman 12/e p 123 To suppress fetal androgen production effectively band consequent virilization Dexamethasone must be initiated before 10 weeks of gestation To treat congenital adrenal hyperplasia is baby hydrocoisone is used.

Question: Thiopentone is absolutely contraindicated in
A. Porphyria
B. Moribund patients
C. Increased intracranial pressure
D. Meningitis
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: (Porphyria): (381 -- KDT 7th edition; 536- Goodman 12th7or variegate)Thiopentone can precipitate acut intermittent or variegate porphyria in susceptible individuals therefore contraindicated. The abnormal synthesis of protoporphyrin (important in hemoglobin production) results in excess porphobilinogen. Barbiturates induce amino levulinic acid synthase, an enzyme responsible for phosphobilinogen synthesis, This leads to excessive porphobilinogen levels and can precipitate acute porphyric crises, that are manifested by severe abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, psychiatric disorders and neurologic abnormalities

Question: Which of the following analgesics should not be given in acute MI ?
A. Methadone
B. Morphine
C. Buprenorphine
D. Pentazocine
Correct Answer: D

Question: Which of the following will you like to give to a pregnant patient to decrease the risk of neural tube defects in the offspring, if your patient is receiving antiepileptic drugs ?
A. Folic acid
B. Vitamin A
C. Vitamin E
D. Pyridoxine
Correct Answer: A

Question: Drug of choice for acute severe asthma is: September 2006
A. Sho acting beta 2 agonists
B. Long acting beta 2 agonists
C. Oral theophylline
D. Inhaled ipratropium bromide
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. A: Sho acting beta 2 agonists Severe asthma (Continuous symptoms; activity limitation; frequent exacerbations/hospitalization) requires: Regular high dose of inhaled steroid (800-2000 microgram/ day) through a large volume spacer device and inhaled long acting beta2 agonist (Salmeterol). Additional treatment with one or more of the following: Leukotriene antagonist/Sustained release oral theophylline/ oral beta2 agonist/ inhaled ipratropium bromide. Rescue treatment with sho acting inhaled beta2 agonist In patients not adequately controlled or those needing frequent emergency care-institute oral steroid therapy.

Question: Anakinra is a -
A. IL - 1 antagonist
B. IL - 2 antagonist
C. IL - 6 antagonist
D. IL - 10 antagonist
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. is 'a' i.e., IL-1 antagonisto Anakinra is an IL-1 antagonist.o It is used for some rare syndromes dependent on IL-1 production :Neonatal - onset inflammatory diseaseMuckle - Wells syndromeFamilial cold urticariaSystemic juvenile - onset inflammatory arthritisRA

Question: A three year old child is brought to the emergency depament having just ingested a large overdose of an antihistaminic drug. This drug is a weak base capable of entering most tissues including the brain. On physical examination the hea rate is 100/ minute, blood pressure is 110/60 mm Hg and the respiratory rate is 20/ minute. In this case of poisoning:
A. Urinary excretion would be accelerated by administration of NH4Cl, an acidifying agent
B. Urinary excretion would be accelerated by administration of NaHCO 3, an alkalinizing agent
C. More of the drug would be ionized at blood pH than at stomach pH
D. Absorption of the drug would be faster from the stomach than from the small intestine.
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: This question can be solved by the knowledge that basic drugs are ionized in the acidic medium and vice-a-versa. This antihistaminic drug is a weak base and will be highly ionized in the acidic urine. As ionized drugs cannot be reabsorbed in the nephron, urinary acidifying agents like NH4Cl will accelerate the excretion of this agent. On the other hand, NaHCO3 will decrease its excretion by increasing the unionized form. Blood pH is slightly alkaline (7.4) whereas gastric pH is highly acidic. Basic drugs are ionized more in the acidic pH, therefore option (c) is false. Only unionized molecules can cross the membranes, therefore more drug will be absorbed by the small intestine (alkaline pH).

Question: Which of the following anti–cancer drug is NOT 'S'–phase specific ?
A. Methotrexate
B. Mercaptopurine
C. Ifosfamide
D. Thioguanine
Correct Answer: C

Question: Anaesthetic agent with vasoconstrictor is contraindicated in ?
A. Digital block
B. Spinal block
C. Epidural block
D. Regional anaesthesia
Correct Answer: A

Question: All of the following are true about Nizatidine except
A. It is a H2 blocker used in peptic ulcer disease
B. It has 100% Bioavailability
C. It also enhances gastric emptying
D. It can also lead to tachycardia
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Nizatidine is a H2 blocker with anticholinesterase activity, thus enhances gastric emptying and can also cause bradycardia.

Question: The most prominent toxic effect associated with acetaminophen use is
A. Respiratory alkalosis
B. Haemorrhage
C. Hepatic necrosis
D. Gastric Ulceration
Correct Answer: C

Question: Which of the following drugs is contraindicated along with spironolactone
A. Chlorothiazide
B. Beta blockers
C. ACE inhibitors
D. Amlodipine
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: CONTRAINDICATIONS / PRECAUTIONS Adrenal insufficiency, anuria, diabetes mellitus, hyperkalemia, renal disease, renal failure, renal impairment. ... Acid/base imbalance, metabolic acidosis, metabolic alkalosis, respiratory acidosis. ... Ascites, biliary cirrhosis, hepatic disease. ... Menstrual irregularity.

Question: Which one of the following is a relatively selective α2 adrenergic blocker with short duration of action ?
A. Prazosin
B. Yohimbine
C. Terazosin
D. Doxazosin
Correct Answer: B

Question: Mechanism of action of the sulfonylureas is
A. K+ ATP channel blocker
B. Na ATP channel blocker
C. Cl ATP channel blocker
D. Ca ATP channel blocker.
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. is 'a' i.e., K ATP channel blocker * Sulfonylurease provoke a brisk release of insulin from pancreas. They act on the so called "Sulfonylurea receptors" (SUR1) on pancreatic b-cell membrane - cause depolarization by reducing conductance of ATP sensitive K+ channels. This enhances influx of Ca+2 - degranulation. They do not cause hypoglycemia in pancreatectomized animals and type 1 diabetes (Presence of at least 30% of functional b-cells in essential for their action). A minor action reducing glucagon secretion by increasing insulin and somatostatin release has been demonstrated.

Question: All pencillins act by: September 2007
A. Inhibiting protein synthesis
B. Inhibiting cell wall synthesis
C. Antifolate
D. Inhibitis DNA gyrase
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. B: Inhibiting cell wall synthesis All penicillin derivatives produce their bacteriocidal effects by inhibition of bacterial cell wall synthesis. Specifically, the cross linking of peptides on the mucosaccharide chains is prevented. If cell walls are improperly made cell walls allow water to flow into the cell causing it to burst and bacterial lysis occurs.

Question: Strength of topical ophthalmic preparations of tobramycin is : September 2009
A. 3 mg/ ml
B. 8 mg/ ml
C. 10 mg/ml
D. 13 mg/ml
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. A: 3 mg/ml Tobramycin works by binding to a site on the bacterial 30S and 50S ribosome, preventing formation of the 70S complex. As a result, mRNA cannot be translated into protein and cell death ensues. Sterile Tobramycin Ophtha Solution (eye-drops) contains tobramycin concentration of 0.3%. It is mixed with 0.01% benzalkonium chloride as a preservative. This concentrations result in 3 mg per ml.

Question: Most potent statin is?
A. Simvastatin
B. Pitavastatin
C. Rosuvastatin
D. Atorvastatin
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Rosuvastatin - most potent best bioavailability: fluvastatin most commonly prescribed- atorvastatin safe for children- pravastatin Ref: KD Tripathi 8th ed

Question: Which of the following opioid can be given intranasally?
A. Tramadol
B. Pethidine
C. Butorphanol
D. Buprenorphine
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Butorphanol is full agonist at kappa & antagonist at μ receptor that can be given intranasally.

