Question: Hypomimia is ?
A. Decreased ability to copy
B. Decreased execution
C. Deficit of expression by gesture
D. Deficit of fluent speech
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. C. Deficit of expression by gestureHypomimiaHypomimia or amimia is a deficit or absence of expression by gesture or mimicry.This is usually most obvious as a lack of facial expressive mobility (mask - like facies).This is a feature of frontal subcoical disease.

Question: Symptomatic treatment is not required in withdrawal of:
A. Cannabis
B. Morphine
C. Alcohol
D. Cocaine
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Since cannabis causes very mild withdrawal symptoms hence, no symptomatic treatment is required. LSD and other hallucinations also do not cause any withdrawal symptoms .

Question: "Castration anxiety" is seen in which phase of Sigmond Freud's psychosexual stages of development
A. Oral
B. Anal
C. Phallic
D. Genital
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Phallic phase (3-5years): Male child develops Oedipus complex (sexual feeling towards mother) and will be afraid that father may castrate him for this termed as "Castration anxiety".

Question: In Profound MR, IQ is
A. 50-69
B. 35-49
C. 20-34
D. < 20
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: IQ range for categoriesICD-10DSM-IVMild50-6950-55 to 70Moderate35-4935-40 to 50-55Severe20-3420-25 to 35-40ProfoundBelow 20Below 20-25Reference: Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry; 3rd edition; Chapter 18; Learning Disability

Question: Postponing paying attention of conscious impulse or conflict is a mature defence mechanism known as -
A. Sublimation
B. Suppression
C. Humor
D. Anticipation
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Suppression is pushing of unwanted feelings into unconscious which has reached conscious awareness.

Question: Least commonly seen in conduct disorder seen in girls:-
A. Run away from home
B. High risk sexual behavior
C. Physical aggression
D. Emotional bullying
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Conduct disorder - Persistent pattern of antisocial behavior in which the individual repeatedly breaks social rules and carries out aggressive acts.in conduct disorder they do it deliberately usually characterized by aggression and violation of the rights of others boys with conduct disorder show physical & relationship aggression but In girls relationship aggression is more predominant than physical aggression children with conduct disorder usually have behaviors characterized by aggression to persons or animals, destruction of propey, deceitfulness or theft, and multiple violations of rules, such as truancy from school.

Question: Post traumatic stress disorder is differentiated from other anxiety disorders by which of the following symptoms?
A. Nightmares
B. Re-living of past adverse event
C. Hypervigilance
D. Avoidance
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: This question is not about the diagnostic features of PTSD. This is about the differential diagnosis. PTSD is an anxiety disorder and it shares symptoms with other disorders. Impoant features in distinguishing the condition are given below. Differential diagnosis: Point 1: Etiologically significant trauma should be present for a diagnosis of PTSD. E.g. A traumatic event in the past. Point 2: 'Intentionality' or 'aboutness' is an impoant factor for PTSD. Nightmares, flashbacks or reliving experiences should be related to the past event. PTSD concerns memory - Intrusion of past stressors into the present. Point 3: Avoid a 'stimulus' or 'activity' that provokes the memory of the past event. In the above question, only reliving experience is mentioned as connected to the past experiences. Hence, that is the answer for this question. All other symptoms can be see in other anxiety disorders. Ref: Kaplan & Sadock's, Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry, 9th Edition, Page 2659

Question: Antidepressant drug used in nocturnal enuresis is:
A. Imipramine
B. Fluoxetine
C. Trazodone
D. Seraline
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Sleep related enuresis- Treatment Bed alarms (behavioral therapy)- TOC Desmopressin (DOC) Imipramine (TCA Antidepressant)

Question: Reversible cause of dementia is -
A. Alzheimer's disease
B. Parkinsonism
C. Hypothyroidism
D. Vascular dementia
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. is 'c' i.e., Hypothyroidism Causes of dementiaReversible causesSurgically treatableMedically treatableo Normal pressure hydrocephaluso Brain tumors (frontal lobe tumor)o Meningiomao Subdural hematoma (Head injury)o Hydrocephaluso Hypothyroidismo Depressiono HIV infectiono Alcohol abuseo Vitamin B12, Folate, Niacin deficiencyo Any metabolic or endocrine disturbanceo Neurosyphiliso Hashimoto's encephalopathy o Wilson's diseaseo Celiac disease or Whipple's diseaseo Chronic meningoencephalitiso Drugs and toxin (toxic dementia)Irreversible causeso Alzheimer's diseaseo Huntington's choreao Lewy body dementiao Vascular (Multi-infarct) dementiao Parkinson's diseaseo Creutzfeld Jakob diseaseo Pick's diseaseo Overall Alzheimer's disease is the most common cause. Vascular dementia is the 2nd most common cause.

Question: Delusion that someone from high socio economic status is loving you is in -
A. Othello syndrome
B. Capgras syndrome
C. De clerambault syndrome
D. Franklin syndrome
Correct Answer: C

Question: Treatment of Choice in Sleep Apnea Syndrome:
A. Continuous positive pressure ventilation.
B. Sedatives.
C. Antidepressants.
D. Antiepileptics
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: (A) Continuous positive pressure ventilation# Sleep apnea: Sleep apnea is a sleep disorder characterized by pauses in breathing during sleep. Each episode, called an apnea, lasts long enough so that one or more breaths are missed, and such episodes occur repeatedly throughout sleep.> The standard definition of any apneic event includes a minimum 10 second interval between breaths, with either a neurological arousal (a 3-second or greater shift in EEG frequency, measured at C3, C4, O1, or O2), a blood oxygen desaturation of 3-4deg/: or greater, or both arousal and desaturation. Sleep apnea is diagnosed with an overnight sleep test called a polysomnogram, or a "Sleep Study".> Treatment: The most common treatment and arguably the most consistently effective treatment for sleep apnea is the use of a continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) device, which 'splints' the patient's airway open during sleep by means of a flow of pressurized air into the throat. However the CPAP machine only assists inhaling whereas a BiPAP machine assists with both inhaling and exhaling, and is used in more severe cases. Medications like Acetazolamide lower blood pH and encourage respiration. Low doses of oxygen are also used as a treatment for hypoxia but are discouraged due to side effects.

Question: A victim of Tsunami has difficulty in overcoming the experience. She still recollects the happening in dreams and thoughts. The most likely diagnosis is
A. Post traumatic stress disorder
B. Conversion disorder
C. Panic disorder
D. Phobia
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: PTSD is characterised by recurrent and intrusive recollections of the stressful event, either in flashbacks (images, thoughts, or perceptions) and/or in dreams. There is an associated sense of re-experiencing of the stressful event. There is marked avoidance of the events or situations that arouse recollections of the stressful event, along with marked symptoms of anxiety and increased arousal. The other impoant clinical features of PTSD include paial amnesia for some aspects of the stressful event, feeling of numbness, and anhedonia (inability to experience pleasure). Ref: A Sho Textbook of Psychiatry, Niraj Ahuja, 7th Edition, pg. no. 112

Question: Alcohol dependence is seen which of the following phase
A. Oral
B. Phallic
C. Anal
D. Latency
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. is 'a' i.e. Oral PhasePsychiatric disorders resulting from fixation of regression to this phase* Oral phase (Birth 1 Vx year)* Alcohol dependence or drug dependence* Severe mood disorder* Dependent personality traits and disorders* Schizophrenia* Ana! phase* Obsessive compulsive traits* Obsessive compulsive disorder* Phallic (oedipal) Phase (3-5 years)* Oedipus complex is the primary cause of hysteria and other neurotic symptoms* Latency phase (5-12 years)* Neurotic disorders* Genital phase (12 years onward)* Neurotic disorders

Question: Alzheimer's disease is associated with: September 2012
A. Delerium
B. Delusion
C. Dementia
D. All of the above
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. C i.e. Dementia Alzheimer's dementia Coical (NOT subcoical) dementia, Progressive, Associated with Apo E gene, Neurofibrillary tangles are seen and Donepezil is used in management

Question: Person preoccupied by worries about ill health is :
A. Hypochondriac
B. Maniac
C. Depressed
D. Delirium
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: A i.e. Hypochondriasis

Question: Arrange the following subtypes of schizophrenia, in order of prognosis, with the best prognosis first and the worst prognosis last, 1. Paranoid schizophrenia2. Catatonic schizophrenia3. Simple schizophrenia4. Disorganised schizophrenia
A. 4-2-1-3
B. 2-1-3-4
C. 2-1-4-3
D. 1-2-4-3
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: The correct sequence is Catatonic schizophrenia followed by Paranoid schizophrenia followed by Disorganised schizophrenia followed by Simple Schizophrenia Please remember in both DSM-5 and ICD-11, these subtypes have been removed

Question: Features of alcohol withdrawl are all EXCEPT: March 2013
A. Epileptic seizure
B. Restlessness
C. Hallucination
D. Hypersomnolence
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ans. D i.e. Hypersomnolence Alcohol and psychiatry Wernicke's encephalopathy involves: Mammilary bodies Korsakoff's syndrome presents as: - Profound and persistent anterograde amnesia and Confabulation Feature of alcoholic paranoia: Hallucination Questionarrie used: CAGE Alcohol withdrawl: - Visual and tactile hallucination (hangover), - Delirium tremens - MC symptom of alcohol withdrawl; Disorientation, Anxiety, Perceptual defect; Chlordiazepoxide is used for management

Question: Which category of ICD is associated with schizophrenia
A. F0
B. F1
C. F2
D. F3
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: ICD ICD mentions International classification of mental and behavioural disorders this was given by WHO( World health Organisation) ICD is used all over the world except America latest edition of ICD is ICD11 ICD 11 was released in 2018 DSM DSM mentions Diagnostic and Statistical manual of mental disorders this was given by APA( American Psychiatric Assosiation) DSM is used in America latest edition of DSM is DSM 5 ICD 11 was released in 2018 categorisation ofmental disorders in ICD 10 is mentioned below F00-F09 Organic, including symptomatic, mental disorders F10-F19 Mental and behavioural disorders due to psychoactive substance use F20-F29 Schizophrenia, schizotypal and delusional disorders F30-F39 Mood disorders ICD-10 Classification of Mental and Behavioural Disorders, World Health Organization, Geneva, 1992

Question: True about treatment of nocturnal enuresis
A. lmipramine
B. CPZ
C. Alprazolam
D. Haloperidol
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: A i.e. Imipramine

Question: A 16 year old boy does not attend school because of the fear of being harmed by school mates. He thinks that his classmates laugh at him and talk about him. He is even scared of going out of the market. He is most likely suffering from:
A. Anxiety disorder
B. Manic depressive psychosis (bipolar disorder)
C. Adjustment reaction
D. Schizophrenia
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: The history is suggestive of delusion of persecution (fear that schoolmates may "harm" him) and delusion of reference (belief that classmates laugh at him and talk about him). Had they not used the term "harm" and "scared" a diagnosis of social anxiety disorder could have been enteained.

Question: Bad trip is seen with which of the following drugs?
A. Cannabis
B. LSD
C. None
D. Both
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: LSD is a type of hallicinogen LSD means lysergic acid diethylamide LSD was introduced and first used by ALBE HOFFMANNBad trip is seen with LSD and cannabis but common with LSD Ref: Essentials of postgraduate psychiatry By JN Vyas 1st ed Pg 330-336

Question: Infidelity & jealousy involving spouse is the thought content of which disorder -
A. Capgras syndrome
B. Othello syndrome
C. Hypochondrial paranomia
D. Declerambault's syndrome
Correct Answer: B

Question: Bedside test for mental status-
A. MMSE
B. GCS
C. MMPI
D. WAIS
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. is 'a' i.e., MMSE o The most w idely used test for bedside evaluation of the mental status is folstein's mini mental state examination (MMSE).

Question: LSD was introducd by
A. albe hoffman
B. delay and deniker
C. John F Cade
D. Egaz Moniz
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Hallucinogens * ALSO CALLED AS Psychotomimetic/ Psychedelic * FIRST Man made HALLICINOGEN ==================== Albe Hoffman * MECHANISM OF ACTION Lysergic acid diethylamide=======serotonin * Introduced by Albe Hoffmann and he himself experienced its effects * Phencyclidine =======NMDA antagonist * Also known as angel dust * Related to ketamine=== dissociative anesthetic * Has anti-suicidal propey Ref.Kaplon and Sadock, synopsis of psychiatry, 11 th edition, pg no.649

Question: Folie a deux is
A. OCD
B. Shared delusion disorder
C. Hysteria
D. Neurasthenia
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Shared psychotic disorder or folie a deux, the characteristic feature is the transmission of delusions from "inducer" (primary patient), who is the "originally" ill patient and suffers from a psychotic disorder to another person who may share the inducer's delusions in entirety or in pa. the person who receives the delusion is usually financially dependent on the inducer person the person who receives the delusion is intellectually less normal and tend to beleive everything that the inducer person tells. both the person who induces and receives the delusion live in close proximity they live in social isolation with less contact with the outside world as they remain together delusion system perpetutes. treament of choice for such patients is seperation of the receiver of delusion from the inducer and the symptom of delusion reduces. Depending on whether the delusions are shared among two, three, four, five and even twelve people, it is called as folie a deux, folie a trios, folie a quatre, folie a cinq and folie a douze. Shared psychotic disorder is mostly observed among people who live in close proximity and in close relationships. Reference: Kaplon and sadock, 11 th edition, synopsis of psychiatry, 11 th edition, pg no. 390

Question: Wernicke&;s encephalopathy involves
A. Mammillary body
B. Thalamus
C. Frontal lobe
D. Arcuate fasciculus
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Wernicke's encephalopathy : The neuropathological lesions are symmetrical and paraventricular, involving the mammillary bodies, the thalamus, the hypothalamus, the midbrain, the pons, the medulla, the fornix, and the cerebellum. Ref: Synopsis of Psychiatry, 11th edition, page 632.

Question: In psychoanalytic terms, obsessive-compulsive disorder is fixed at -
A. Oedipal stage
B. Genital stage
C. Oral stage
D. Anal stage
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: OCD results from a regression from the oedipal phase to anal phase of psychosexual development, i.e. In OCD fixation occurs in anal stage (Note - Regression is reversion from higher level of development to lower level of development).

Question: Drug of choice for OCD is?
A. Clomipramine
B. Fluoxetine
C. Carbamezapine
D. Chlorpromazine
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: ANSWER: (B) FluoxetineREF: Kaplan 9th ed p - 622OCDTreatment of choice: behaviour therapyDrug of choice: SSRI2nd drug of choice: comipramine

Question: A patient was diagnosed with schizophrenia and was staed on haloperidol 5mg. On 3rd day he presented with uprolling of eyes. A complete neurological examination revealed no spasticity or any other abnormalities except uprolling of eyeballs. Visual acuity was found to be normal. What is your likely diagnosis?
A. Seizure
B. Acute dystonia
C. Malingering
D. Akathesia
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: * <48 hours of staing antipsychotics * M.C in======Younger black males * If a patient develops dystonia he is more prone for eps Patient considers this as an Allergic reaction , thereby may stop drugs Layryngeal dystonia is a Psychiatric emergency, should be treated with IV lorazepam TREATMENT * Diphenhydramine * Benztropine mesylate * Prophylactic anticholinergics helps Ref.Kaplon and sadock, synopsis of psychiatry, 11 th edition, pg no. 923

Question: NREM sleep is associated with:-
A. Basal forebrain area
B. Dorsal raphe nucleus
C. Medulla
D. All of the above
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: NREM sleep generation is associated with 5 anatomical sites: * Basal forebrain area Thalamus Hypothalamus Dorsal raphe nucleus Nucleus tractus solitaries of the medulla Preoptic lesions produce hyposomnia, whereas electrical and thermal stimulation of this area produces sleep changes. Thalamus (especially reticular formation) plays an active role in production of coical sleep spindles and delta waves.

Question: Which of the following excludes painful stimuli from awareness?
A. Repression
B. Reaction formation
C. Projection
D. Rationalization
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Repression is the defense mechanism which removes painful memories or unacceptable desires away from the consciousness or awareness.

Question: Risk factor for suicide -
A. Female sex
B. Unmarried
C. Age 30 years
D. Married
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. is 'b' i.e., Unmarried Causes/Risk factors for suicidePsychiatric disorders : - Depression (most common), alcoholism (2nd me), Drug/Substance dependence, Schizophrenia, Dementia.Physical illness : - Cancer, AIDS, Multiple sclerosis, Head trauma.Psychosocial factors : - Failure in love, marital difficulties, family dispute, illegitimate pregnancy.Biological factors : - Decrease in serotoninOther - Male sex, Age > 40 years. Single (Unmarried, divorced or widowed), previous suicide attempt, social isolation.

Question: An elderly woman suffering from schizophrenia is on antipsychotic medication. She developed purposeless involuntary facial and limb movements, constant chewing and puffing of cheeks. Which of the following drugs is least likely to be involved in this side effect -
A. Haloperidol
B. Clozapine
C. Fluphenazine
D. Loxapine
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Purposeless involuntary facial and limb movements, constant chewing and puffing of checks suggest the diagnosis of tardive dyskinesia (an extrapyramidal side effect of antipsychotics).
Clozapine does not produce extrapyramidal side effects.

Question: A man coming from a mountain whose wife died 6 months prior says that his wife appeared to him and asked him to join her. The diagnosis is
A. Normal grief
B. Grief psychosis
C. Bereavement reaction
D. Supernatural phenomenon
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: B i.e. Grief psychosis Bereavement, Grief, or Mourning is a psychological reaction of those who survive a significant loss. Differences between normal & abnormal grief:Identifying with a deceased person such as taking on ceain admired traits or treasuring ceain possessions is normal; believing that one is the deceased person or is dying of exactly what the deceased person died of (if in fact, this is untrue) is not normal.- Hearing the fleeting, transient voice of a deceased person may be normal; persistent, intrusive, complex auditory hallucinations are not normal.Denial of ceain aspects of the death is normal; denial that includes the belief that the dead person is still alive is not normal.GriefIs a normal response of an individual to the loss of a loved object which presents with:- Various physical & mental symptoms like sighing, crying, choking, breathing difficulty, weakness, etc. - Preoccupation with the memory of deceased- Sense of presence of deceased & misinterpretation of voices & faces of others as that of lost. - Seeing a person in dreams & fleeting hallucinations.Abnormal Grief Exaggeration of one or more normal symptoms of grief- Duration > 6 months. Pathological/Morbid GriefComplicated Grief1Associated with psychotic orneurotic illness* Chronic Grief* Delayed Grief* Inhibited Grief =* Anniversary Reaction=Duration > 6 monthsOnset after 2 weeks of lost (death)Denial of lossGrief reaction on the death anniversary Over idealization of the deceased.

Question: False statement regarding myocardial infarction and depression is:
A. Depression is a risk factor for MI
B. MI is a risk factor for depression
C. SSRI's can be used post MI for treatment of depression
D. Only cognitive behavioral therapy is used after MI
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: The first three options are correct. Depression and myocardial infarction are risk factors for each other. The treatment of depression after MI involves both medications and CBT.

Question: Episodes of depression in major depressive disorder tend to:
A. Increase in frequency with age
B. Decrease in length with age
C. Last for about 9 months when treated
D. Have a rapid onset
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Episodes of major depression tend to increase in both length and frequency with age. When treated, episodes of major depression last for about 3 months. If untreated, depression lasts from 6 to 12 months. Episodes of major depression often have a gradual onset and occur an average of 5 to 6 times over a 20-year period.

Question: A patient on t/t for psychiatric disorder takes overdose of a drug, develops bradycardia, hypotension, decreased sweating and salivation. The likely drug is
A. Amitryptilline
B. Lithium
C. Selegiline
D. Amphetamine
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: A i.e. Amitryptilline

Question: The Halstead Retain battery involves all except :
A. Finger oscillation
B. Constructional praxis
C. Rhythm
D. Actual performance
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: In Halstead - Reitan battery test, the battery is composed of ten tests :

Category test.
Tactual performance test.
Rhythm test.
Finger - oscillation test.
Speech-sound perception test.
Trail - making test.
Critical flicker frequency.
Time sense test.
Aphasia screening test.
Sensory - perceptual test.

Question: Which of the following is NOT TRUE about post - traumatic stress disorder?
A. The onset of illness may occur many months after the traumatic event
B. Individual debriefing and early counselling are most effective method of treatment
C. Eye movement desensitization and reprocessing is effective
D. There is high risk of alcohol abuse in patients suffering from this disorder
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Treatment of choice for PTSD is psychotherapy in the form of cognitive behavior therapy often in combination with pharmacotherapy.
There is no evidence that single - session individual psychological briefing is a useful treatment for PTSD.
Eye movement desensitization and reprocessing (EMDR) is an effective treatment for PTSD.
Symptoms of PTSD develop within 6 months of the stressor, however, 10% patients have delayed onset.
PTSD patients are high risk for alcohol abuse.

Question: A 68-year-old male is brought to the outpatient by his wife due to increasing forgetfulness. On taking history in details, wife repoed that for around 6 months patient is having trouble in organising the finances and paying bills, something he has done all his life. He has also become withdrawn and has decreased meeting people. The patient also behaved inappropriately with a female neighbour couple of says back, which is much against his usual nature. The patient denies having any problems and seems indifferent to his wife's concern. He has a medical history of hypeension and type 2 diabetes mellitus There is a family history of Alzheimer disease. On MMSE, score came out to be 23. Which of the following is the most likely diagnosis?
A. Alzheimer disease
B. Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease
C. Dementia with Lewy bodies
D. Frontotemporal dementia
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: The history is suggestive of executive dysfunction (trouble in organising the finances and paying bills), apathy and disinhibition (decreased socialisation and inappropriate behaviour with women), lack of insight (denies having any problem) and memory disturbances. This is suggestive of frontotemporal dementia, in which personality changes are prominent, memory disturbances appear later in frontotemporal dementia. In contrast, in alzheimers disease memory disturbances are prominent early in the disorder and personality changes later. Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease which is caused by a prion manifests with rapidly progressive dementia, myoclonus, and cerebellar dysfunction.

Question: A non diabetic, non hypertensive patient has some extra beats in pulse. Doctor informed that is benign and no intervention required. But patient is worried that it is a serious cardiac disorder and is still going for repeated investigation & going from doctor to doctor. This is a type of:
A. Conversion disorder
B. Hypochondriosis
C. Somatization
D. Depression
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Interpretation of benign symptom (extra beats) as a serious illness (cardiac disorder) is suggestive of Hypochondriosis.

Question: Treatable causes of dementia are -a) Alzheimer's ds.b) Hypothyroidismc) Multi-infarct dementia d) SDH (subdural h'ge) e) Hydrocephalus
A. abc
B. ade
C. bde
D. bce
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Perhaps the use of word “treatable” is inappropriate here since all the types of dementia can be “treated”. The examiner most likely wants to ask the types which can be “reversed” or “cured”

Question: Which of the following has to be present for diagnosis of major depressive disorder
A. Loss of interest or pleasure
B. Recurrent suicidal tendency
C. Insomnia
D. Indecisiveness
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: In typical depressive episodes of all three varieties described below (mild, moderate, and severe), the individual usually suffers from depressed mood, loss of interest and enjoyment, and reduced energy leading to increased fatigability and diminished activity. Reference: International classification of diseases 10, page 119.

Question: Persistent  and inappropriate repetition of response beyond the point of relevance is called
A. Thought insertion
B. Thought block
C. Perseveration
D. Neologism
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: The patient repeats same response beyond the point of relevance.
Example :

What is your name? – Darshan
What you ate in the morning? – Darshan
Where do you live? – Darshan

Question: Lallu a 22 yrs. old male suffers from decreased sleep, increased sexual activity, excitement and spending excessive money for last 8 days. The diagnosis is-
A. Confusion
B. Mania
C. Hyperactivity
D. Loss of memory
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Decreased sleep, increased sexual activity, excitement and spending excessive money are symptoms of mania.

Question: An alcoholic is brought to the casualty, 3 days after he quit alcohol, with the complaints of irrelevant talking. On examination, he is found to be disoriented to time, place and person. He also has visual illusions and hallucinations. There is no history of head injury. The most probable diagnosis is:
A. Schizophrenia
B. Delirium tremens
C. Dementia praecox
D. Korsakoff psychosis
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: This patient in the question who is a chronic alcoholic is showing features of delirium tremens, which typically appears after 3-4 days of abstinence from alcohol (24 hours to 7 days). Ref: CURRENT Diagnosis and Treatment: Emergency Medicine, 7th Edition, Chapter 37 ; CURRENT Diagnosis and Treatment: Psychiatry, 2nd Edition, Chapter 14

Question: Which of the following antismoking drugs can lead to suicidal ideation?
A. Baclofen
B. Rimonobant
C. Varenicline
D. Naltrexone
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Vareniciline is a partial agonist at α4 β2 substype of nicotine receptor used to treat tobbacco addiction.
Side effects include suicidal ideation, nausea, headache & insomnia.

Question: Eating disorder with normal weight is?
A. Anorexia nervosa
B. Bulimia nervosa
C. Binge eating disorder
D. None of the above
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. B. Bulimia nervosaAnorexia nervosa - Under weightBulimia nervosa - Normal WeightBinge eating disorder - Over weight.

Question: All are true about type 1 schizophrenia except?
A. Acute illness
B. Good prognosis
C. Negative symptoms
D. Intellect maintained
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. is 'c' i.e., Negative symptoms Type I (Reactive or acute schizophrenia) Type II (Process schizophrenia) Characteristic symptoms Type of illness Response to neuroleptics Outcome Intellectual impairment Etiology Positive symptoms (Hallucination,Acute Delusion, Thought) Good Reversible Absent Dopamine overactivity Good Negative symptoms (Affect flattening, poverity of speech loss of drive Chronic Poor Long standing Sometimes present Structural changes in brain (dilated ventricle on CT scan Poor

Question: SSRIs should be carefully used in the young for the management of depression due to increase in:
A. Nihilism ideation
B. Guilt ideation
C. Suicidal ideation
D. Envious ideation
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: The use of SSRIs can increase suicidal ideations. This side effect is more common in children and adolescents and hence these medications should be used cautiously in that age group.

Question: Treatment of choice for generalized anxiety disorder is?
A. Benzodiazepines
B. Neuroleptics
C. Beta blockers
D. Barbiturates
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans is 'a' i.e. Benzodiazepines Treatment of generalized anxiety disorderA Benzodiazepines are the drug of choice. Drugs in this group are diazepam, Lorazepam, Alprazolam, Oxazepam, chlordiazepoxide.B. Other drugs used are buspirone; TCA (amptriptyline, imipramine, clomipramine, desipramine); SSRIs (Fluoxetine, Sertaline, Paroxetine, Citalopram); SNRIs (Venalafaxine), p-blockers.C. Anticonvulsants with GABAergic properties may also be effective against anxiety, e.g., Gabapentin, Oxcarbazepine, Tiagabine, pregabalin, and Valproate (divalporex).

Question: A patient of Schizophrenia was staed on neuroleptics, his psychotic symptoms began to improve however he developed sadness, would talks less to others, would mostly remain to bed. This presentation could be caused by all of following except:
A. Parkinsonism
B. Major depression
C. Negative symptoms are still persisting
D. He is reacting to external stimuli
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: This question is basically asking for the differential diagnosis of symptoms of ' sadness of mood, talking less and staying on the bed" in a patient of schizophrenia who has been staed on antipsychotics. 1. The sadness of mood and decreased interaction can be of course due to depression 2. Negative symptoms of schizophrenia have a similar presentation where avolition can result in 'staying on the bed' and asociality and alogia may result in decrease interaction 3. Fuher, the use of antipsychotics can cause drug-induced parkinsonism which again looks quite similar to negative symptoms. The fouh option 'responding to external stimuli' doesn't explain the symptoms and hence is the answer

Question: Adverse effect of clozapine:
A. Hypeension
B. Sialorrhea
C. Extrapyramidal S/E
D. Neuroleptic malignant syndrome
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: B i.e. Sialorrhea

Question: Poor prognostic factor in chizophrenia is:
A. Acute onset
B. Family history of affective disorder
C. Middle age
D. Past history of schizophrenia
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Past history of schizophrenia

Question: The adverse effect of clozapine -
A. Hypertension
B. Sialorrhea
C. Extrapyramidal S/E
D. Neuroleptic malignant syndrome
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Side effects of clozapine

Agranulocytosis
Urinary incontinence
Unstable BP & Tachycardia
Hypersalivation (sialorrhoea)
Worsening of diabetes
Weight gain
Seizures
Sedation

Question: A lady used to repeatedly wash her hands due to the fear of acquiring AIDS is due to
A. OCD
B. Mania
C. Depression
D. Anxiety
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: (A) OCD # Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is a psychiatric anxiety disorder most commonly characterized by a subject's obsessive, distressing, intrusive thoughts and related compulsions (tasks or "rituals") which attempt to neutralize the obsessions.# Obsessions are defined by:> Recurrent and persistent thoughts, impulses, or images that are experienced at some time during the disturbance, as intrusive and inappropriate and that cause marked anxiety or distress.> Thoughts, impulses, or images are not simply excessive worries about real-life problems.> Person attempts to ignore or suppress such thoughts, impulses, or images, or to neutralize them with some other thought or action.> Person recognizes that the obsessional thoughts, impulses, or images are a product of his or her own mind, and are not based in reality.> Tendency to haggle over small details that the viewer is unable to fix or change in any way. This begins a mental pre-occupation with that which is inevitable.# Compulsions are defined by:> Repetitive behaviors or mental acts that the person feels driven to perform in response to an obsession, or according to rules that must be applied rigidly.> The behaviors or mental acts are aimed at preventing or reducing distress or preventing some dreaded event or situation; however, these behaviors or mental acts either are not connected in a realistic way with what they are designed to neutralize or prevent or are clearly excessive.

Question: All of the following are known predisposing factors for Alzheimer's disease except :
A. Down-syndrome
B. Low education level
C. Smoking
D. Female sex
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Answer is C (Smoking):Smoking has not been mentioned as a risk factor, for Alzheimer's disease.

Question: Cognitive model of depression is given by ?
A. Ellis
B. Beck
C. Godfrey
D. Meicheinbanon
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Beck Cognitive therapy is a psychotherapy developed by American pyschiatrist Aaron T. Beck. Cognitive therapy is one of the therapeutic approaches within the larger group of cognitive behavioural therapies. Cognitive therapy seeks to help the client overcome difficulties by identifying and changing dysfunctional thinking, behaviour and emotional responses. This involves helping clients develop skills for modifying beliefs, identifying distoed thinkings, relative to others in different ways and changing behaviours. Treatment is based on collaboration between client and therapist and on testing beliefs. Therapy may consist of testing the assumptions which one makes and identifying how some of one's usually unquestioned thoughts are distoed, unrealistic and unhelpful. Once, those thoughts have been challenged, ones feelings about the subject matter of those thoughts are more easily subject to change. Beck initially focussed on depression and developed a list of errors in thought that he proposed could maintain depression, including arbitrary inference, selective abstraction, over generalization and magnification (of negatives) and minimization (of positives). According to Beck's theorey of the etiology of depression, depressed people acquire a negative view of the world in childhood and adolescence. Children and adolescent who suffer from depression acquire this negative view earlier. Depressed people acquire such view through a loss of a parent, rejection by peers, (criticism from teachers or parents, the depressive attitude and other negative events). When the person with such view encounters a situation that resembles the original conditions of the learned view in some way, even remotely, the negative views of the persons are activated. A simple example may illustrate the principle of how cognitive therapy works Having made a mistake at work, a person may believe "I am useless and can't do anything right at work". Strongly believing this then tends to worsen his mood. The problem may be worsened fuher if the individual reacts by avoiding activities and then behaviourally confirming the negative belief to himself. As a result, any adaptive response and fuher constructive consequences become unlikely, which reinforces the original belief of being useless. In therapy, the latter example could be identified as a self fulfilling prophecy or "problem cycle" and the effos of the therapist and client would be directed at working together to change it.

Question: In alcohol withdrawal which is not seen -
A. Seizure
B. Blackout
C. Coarse tremor
D. Hallucination
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Blackout occurs during acute intoxication (not during withdrawal). All the other options can occur in alcohol withdrawal.

Question: A patient gets tingling when his bed light is flashed suddenly. Which type of hallucination is this :
A. Hypnagogic hallucinations
B. Hypnopompic hallucinations
C. Reflex hallucinations
D. Functional hallucinations
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: "Example of reflex hallucination : when the light flashes the patient gets tingling sensation".

Question: A 20 year old boy c/o hearing of voices, aggressive behavior since 2 days. He has fever since 2 days. When asked to his family, they says that he has been muttering to self and gesticulating. There is no h/o of psychiatric illness. Likely diagnosis is
A. Dementia
B. Acute psychosis
C. Delirium
D. Delusional disorder
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Acute psychosis ??? [Ref: Kaplan and Saddock synopsis of Psychiatry 10/e p 516-5171We are unable to reach a conclusive diagnosis with the information provided in the question.Acute onset, presence of fever, no history of psychiatric illness suggests delirium.But, the diagnosis of delirium cannot be made definitively in the absence of disorientation.In the question there is no definite comment on orientation of the patient.May be, that suggests, the patient is not disoriented.Acute onset, presence of perceptual disturbances (hallucination and other symptoms point towards acute psychosis.But acute psychosis seems unlikely because:-- Absence of cognitive dysfunction or thought disorders.- Absence of H/o psychiatric illness or substance abuse disorders.Psychotic disorders cannot be diagnosed only in the presence of perceptual disturbances. Some disorder in cognitive dysfunction or thought disorders is also required.May be this is a case of acute transient psychosis- These disorders do not give the classical manifestations of psychotic disorders.- They are characterized by the predominance of perceptual disturbances, and they do not fulfil the criteria of psychotic disorders.Acute and Transient Psychotic disordersA large number of psychiatrists especially from the developing countries like India, repoed that many patients developed an acute psychotic disorder that neither followed the course of schizophrenia nor resembled mood disorders in the clinical picture and usually had a better prognosis than schizophrenia.Acute and transient psychosis as a descriptive entity was recognized only with the advent of 1CD-10 in 1992. Where it is included under psychotic disorder.- The key features that characterize the disorder are an -- acute within (2 weeks) onset in all the cases presence of typical syndrome which are described as rapidly changing variables, polymorphic states and typical schizophrenic symptoms evidence ,for associated acute stress in a substantial number of cases and complete recovery in most cases within 2-3 months.A pa from these criteria ICD-10 also provides diagnostic guide- lines which include- Not meeting the criteria for manic or depressive episodes although the affective symptoms may be prominent - Absence of organic causation although perplexity confusion and inattention may he present. - Absence of obvious intoxication by drugs or alcohol.It is evident that ICD 10 intends to "clearly differentiate" the concept of acute transient psychosis .from those of affective psychosis, organic psychosis and drug induced psychosis.This is the point which is creating doubt in our minds.The ICD wants to clearly differentiate it from organic psychosis.- The boy presents with "fever" therefore the organic cause for the psychosis cannot be ruled out. - May be the psychosis is due to fever (some C.N.S. infection)- If fever had not been mentioned the diagnosis would have been clear. But the presence of fever prevents us from diagnosing this as acute transient psychosis.- The correct option would have been "organic psychosis" or "psychosis due to general medical condition". - Acute psychosis cannot be diagnosed without addressing the organic basis of the disease.Four subtypes of acute transient psychosis are described in ICD 10 -Acute polymorphic psychotic disorder without symptoms of schizo- phrenia - Acute polymorphic psychotic disorders with symptoms (?f schizo- phrenia - Acute schizophrenia like psychotic disorder- Acute predominantly delusional psychotic disorderOverall, duration of total episode should not exceed 3 months and that .for schizophrenic symptoms should not exceed 1 month. There is provision for change of diagnosis to schizophrenia.

Question: False about Neurotic disorders
A. Aware of reality
B. Delusion absent
C. Hallucination absent
D. Loss of insight
Correct Answer: D

Question: Which of the following describes Satyriasis?
A. Decreased sexual drive in male
B. Increased sexual drive in male
C. Decreased sexual drive in female
D. Increased sexual drive in female
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. B. Increased sexual drive in male* Nymphomaniac: excessive sexual desire in females.* Satyriasis: excessive sexual desire in males

Question: Which of the following statements about the pathology in Alzheimer's disease is not true:
A. Neuritic Plaques are formed of amyloid protein
B. Neurofibrillary tangles (NFT) are made of tau protein
C. NFTs appear extracellularly before intracellular appearance
D. Number of NFTs correlates with dementia
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Answer is C (NFTs appear extracellularly before intracellular appearance):NFTs are typically seen intracellularly within the soma and proximal dendrites of neurons. Neurofibrillary Tangles (NFTs) are intracellular accumulations of hyperphosphorylated 'tau' proteins.Neurofibrillary Tangles are Intracellular AccumulationsNeurofibrillary Tangles are intracellular accumulations of hyperphosphorylated microtubule binding protein 'tau'.Paired helical filaments of tau protein (NFTs) form intracellularly within the soma and proximal dendrites of neurons.These cytoskeletal protein tangles (NFTs), initially impede cellular metabolism and axosplasmic transpo leading to impaired synaptic function and eventually to neuronal death.These neurofibrillaty tangles may be seen as extracellular tangles after degeneration of the neuron as evidence of the neuronal cell's demiseNeurofibrillary Tangles are intracellular accumulations that may appear extracellularly alter degeneration of neuron (neuronal death)Histopathological Hallmarks of Alzheimer's DiseaseAmyloid Plaques (Extracellular)Amyloid Neuritic Plaques are formed by extracellular accumulation of beta amyloid deposits within the neutropil'Neuritic' or 'Senile' I3-amyloid plaques are an early histopathological sign of Alzheimer's disease (that occur rarely in healthy subjects)The amyloid 13-protein accumulated in single neuritic plaques is toxic to surrounding structures and adjacent neurons.Clinicopathological studies have shown that amy/aid burden does not directly correlate with severity or duration of dementia.Neurofibrillary Tangles (Intracellular)Neurofibrillary tangles arc formed by intracellular accumulation of hyperphosphorylated microtubule binding protein 'tau'.NFT's occur in many neurodegenerative diseases and /or a group of diseases called laupathies'.These include Frontotemporal dementia, Pick's disease etc. The cooccurance of fi-amyloid plaques with NFT's suggests a diagnosis of AD.The NFT's are toxic to the neurons and neurons with NFT's eventually die and degenerate leaving a residual `ghost tangle', in the extracellular space reminding of the pyramidal cell body in which it was initially formed.Clinicopathological studies have shown that dementia correlates more strongly with NFT's than with senile plaques (3-amyloid)

Question: Estimation of serum levels is impoant for which of the following drug: September 2009
A. Haloperidol
B. Benzodiazepines
C. Lithium
D. Chlorpromazine
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. C: LithiumLithium has been the drug of choice for the treatment of maniac episode (acute phase) as well as for prevention of fuher episodes in bipolar mood disorder.It has also been used in the treatment of depression with less success.Lithium needs to be closely monitored by repeated blood levels, as the difference between the therapeutic (0.8-1.2 mEq/ L) and lethal blood levels (more than 2.5-3.0 mEq/1) is not very wide (narrow therapeutic index).

Question: MC side effect of lithium: March 2003
A. Polyuria
B. Fine tremors
C. Polydipsia
D. Weight gain
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. B i.e. Fine tremors

Question: Drug of choice for obsessive - compulsive neurosis is :
A. Imipramine
B. CPZ
C. Carbamazapine
D. Clomipramine
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: SSRIs are the drugs of choice for OCD. However, amongst the given options no drug is SSRI. Amongst the tricyclic antidepressants, clomipramine is the DOC.

Question: Bleuler's symptoms for schizophrenia are all except
A. Loosening of association
B. Affect disturbances
C. Autism
D. Hallucinations
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Eugen Bleuler's Fundamental Symptoms of Schizophrenia (Also called as 4 A's of Bleuler) 1. Ambivalence: Marked inability to decide for or against 2. Autism: Withdrawal into self 3. Affect disturbances: Disturbances of affect such as inappropriate affect 4. Association disturbances: Loosening of associations; thought disorder Ref: A Sho Textbook of Psychiatry, Niraj Ahuja, 7th Edition, pg. no. 55

Question: All of the following are habbit disorders, except:
A. Thumb sucking
B. Tics
C. Temper tantrums
D. Nail biting
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Tics are rapid and reccurent moments for brief duration and it is not included under habbit disorders.

Question: Hypnagogic hallucinations are seen in
A. Depression
B. Mania
C. Narcolepsy
D. Schizophrenia
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: NarcolepsyThe classic tetrad of symptoms is:i. Sleep attacks (most common): ii. Cataplexy: iii. Hypnagogic hallucinations: iv. Sleep paralysis (least common): Ref: A Sho Textbook of Psychiatry, Niraj Ahuja, 7th Edition, pg. no. 138

Question: Patient can hear music every time when he turns on the tap and hears the sound of water. This is an example of :
A. Reflex hallucination
B. Functional hallucination
C. Visual hallucination
D. 1st person auditory hallucination
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Functional hallucination : here the stimulus and perecption are in same modality.
V/S
Reflex hallucination : here the stimulus and pereception are in different modality.

Question: Drug of choice for schizophrenic patient with poor oral absorption is:
A. Haloperidol
B. Fluphenazine
C. Clozapine
D. Olanzapie
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Clozapine

Question: A 40 year old female reports of sudden bouts of anxiety which would occur anytime and associated with sweating, palpitation, derealization, and feeling of going crazy. These episodes would last for 20 -25 minutes. So much so that she fears of having these episodes in future. All routine investigations are normal. What is the diagnosis?
A. Generalized anxiety disorder
B. Obsessive-compulsive disorder
C. Panic disorder
D. Tourette's syndrome
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. C. Panic disorderPanic attack: acute intense attack of anxiety accompanied by feelings of impending doom.Symptoms during panic attack usually involve* Sudden onset of palpitations, Sweating, Trembling or shaking,* Shortness of breath, Feelings of choking, Chest pain,* Nausea/abdominal distress, Feeling dizzy, unsteady,* Chills or heat sensations,* Paresthesias, derealization or depersonalization.* Fear of losing control or "going crazy or fear of dying.Recurrent panic attacks is Panic disorder

Question: In which condition doctor is passive
A. Classical psychoanalysis
B. Psychoanalytic psychoanalysis
C. Both
D. None
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Classical Psychoanalysis No detailed history taking, mental status examination, or formalised psychiatric diagnosis is attempted. The patient is allowed to communicate unguided, by using 'free association'. The therapist remains passive with a non-directive approach; however, the therapist constantly challenges the existing defences and interprets resistance (during the therapy) and transference (patient's feelings, behaviours and relationship with the therapist). No direct advice is ever given to the patient. The crux of the therapy is on interpretation. During the therapy, the patient typically lies on the couch, with the therapist sitting just out of vision. Ref: A Sho Textbook of Psychiatry, Niraj Ahuja, 7th Edition, pg. no. 213

Question: Which of the following indications of deep brain stimulation is not FDA approved?
A. OCD
B. Major depression
C. Parkinsonism
D. Dystonia
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: FDA approved indications for deep brain stimulation are: a. Parkinson's disease and essential tremors b. Dystonia c. Obsessive compulsive disorder

Question: Hallucinations are -
A. Feeling of familiarity with unfamiliar thing
B. Alteration of perception of ones reality
C. Misinterpretation of stimuli
D. Perception occurring without external stimulation
Correct Answer: D

Question: The major difference between typical and atypical antipsychotics is that
A. The latter cause minimal or no increase in prolactin
B. The former cause tardive dyskinesia
C. The former are available as parenteral preparations
D. The latter cause substantial sedation
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: The most impoant reason to classify the antipsychotics in typical and atypical agents is the occurrence of extrapyramidal symptoms. Typical antipsychotics have significant extrapyramidal symptoms such as parkinsonism, acute muscle dystonia and tardive dyskinesia. These side-effects are negligible or minimal with atypical agents like clozapine, olanzapine and risperidone.

Question: An elderly house wife lost her husband who died suddenly of Myocardial infarction couple of years ago. They had been staying alone for almost a decade with infrequent visits from her son and grandchildren. About a week after the death she heard his voice clearly talking to her as he would in a routine manner from the next room. She went to check but saw nothing. Subsequently she often heard his voice conversing with her and she would also discuss her daily matters with him. This however, provoked anxiety and sadness of mood when she was preoccupied with his thought. She should be treated with:
A. Clornipramine.
B. Aiprazolam
C. Electroconvulsive therapy.
D. Haloperidol.
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: D i.e. HaloperidolThe diagnosis of this lady is morbid grief When there is an exaggeration of one or more symptoms of normal grief or the duration becomes prolonged beyond 6 months without recovery, it is k/a morbid grief.Preoccupation with the memory of deceased is a characteristic featureQ.Idealization of deceased (ignoring his negative qualities).Sense of presence of deceased in the surroundings & misinterpretation of voices or faces of others as that of lost person. Rarely fleeting hallucinations may occur.Treatment - In morbid & complicated grief, medication depends on presenting clinical features.As this lady is mainly having problem of auditory hallucination (1/t sadness & anxiety) - antipsychotic like haloperidol is needed to treat her.

Question: Which of the following is associated with Madonna-Putana complex ?
A. Female arousal disorder
B. Male hypoactive sexual desire disorder
C. Male erectile disorder
D. Anorgasmia
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Madonna-Putana complex Psychogenic male erectile disorder Can be organic or psychologic or both. Inability to have arousal towards a woman , the man desires. Men have arousal only with women whom they see as degraded.

Question: Beta blockers are indicated in -
A. Phobic disorders
B. Anxiety
C. Schizophrenia
D. Mania
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. is 'b' Anxiety Antianxiety Drugs areBenzodiazepinesB BlockersBuspironeMeprobamate & Hydroxyzine

Question: A 70 year old female with psychiatric symptoms diagnosed of having schizophrenia. Which is the poor prognostic factor in schizophrenia?
A. Acute onset
B. Middle age
C. Family history of affective disorder
D. Gradual onset
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Predictors of poorer outcome in schizophrenia:Age below 20Dilated ventricles, brain atrophy in CT or MRINegative symptoms (e.g., flat affect, povey of thought, apathy, asociality); obsessive-compulsive symptomsIrregular occupational recordInsidious onsetSlow rate of progressionmalesYears of duration prior to assessmentCannabis useAbsence of precipitating factorsStressful lifeFamily history of schizophrenia (not affective disorder)Presence of other adverse social factorsPrenatal adverse eventsPresence of ceain gene polymorphism, e.g., COMT. NMDA2APRef: Meltzer H.Y., Bobo W.V., Heckers S.H., Fatemi H.S. (2008). Chapter 16. Schizophrenia. In M.H. Ebe, P.T. Loosen, B. Nurcombe, J.F. Leckman (Eds),CURRENT Diagnosis & Treatment: Psychiatry, 2e.

Question: which of the following antidepressent causes hypeensive crisis
A. dapoxetine
B. duloxetine
C. clomipramine
D. phenelezine
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: MAOI * IMPOANCE First class of antidepressant drugs that were introduced * MECHANISM There are three monoamines namely dopamine, adrenaline and serotonin. These mon amines are degraded by monoamine oxidase. MAOI inhibit this enzyme and acts increasing monoamines * DRUGS Phenelezine Tranylcipromine * USE ATYPICAL DEPRESSION, depression with reverse vegetative symptoms * SIDE EFFECTS Hypeensive crisis Cheese reaction When a patient on MAOI takes tyramine rich food like tyramine there will be increased release of monoamines. These excess monoamines cannot be degraded by MAO as it is blocked by MAOI. Thus, this may result in hypeensive crisis. Paresthesia's due to pyridoxine deficiency LIKE IPRONIAZID WEIGHT gain SEXUAL dysfunction Ref. Kaplon and sadock, synopsis of psychiatry, 11 th edition, pg no, 955

Question: A 20 year old boy c/o hearing of voices, aggressive behavior since 2 days. He has fever since 2 days. When asked to his family, they say that he has been muttering to self and gesticulating. There is no of psychiatric illness. Likely diagnosis is:
A. Dementia
B. Acute psychosis
C. Delirium
D. Delusional disorder
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: B i.e. Acute psychosis- Delusions or hallucinations (suchas hearing voices in this case) with grossly disorganized speech and behavior (such as muttering to self, gesticulation, aggressiveness in this case) of acute onset with normal cognition & consciousness indicate the diagnosis of acute psychosis (i.e. psychosis of acute onset). This acute psychosis may be d/t psychotic disorder d/t general medical condition (such as high fever as in this case) or d/t brief psychotic disorder (DSMIVTR), or d/t acute and transient psychotic disorder (ICD-10). So here the term acute psychosis is used to depict the clinical picture not the cause of that clinical picture.Delirium can also present acute onset disorganized behavior (agitation) and speech (incoherent) with delusions or hallucinations but the delusions are poorly elaborated & transient, the course of disease is fluctuant (eg sun downing). And characteristically there is clouding of (disturbance in) consciousnesss (i.e. reduced clarity of awareness of the environment) and disorientation (change in cognition) in delirium. Just like psychosis clinical picture of delirium may also be d/t various reasons such as general medical condition / substance intoxication/ withdrawal.- Dementia is a chronic slow/insiduous process presenting with decrement in intellectual abilities (such as sho & long term memory, judgement, abstract thinking, impulse control, personal care and personality)Q.- Delusional disorder presents with nonbizarre delusions (involving situations that occur in real life) of at least 1 months durationQ. Apa from the impact of delusion (s) or its ramifications, functioning is not markedly impaired and behavior is not obviously odd or bizarre (i.e. criteria. A of schizophrenia has never been met). However, tactile or olfactory hallucinations may be present if they are related to delusional theme.

Question: Donepezil is used in treatment of -
A. Alzheimer's dementia
B. Schizophrenia
C. Anxiety disorder
D. Depression
Correct Answer: A

Question: Fear of open spaces is: NIMHANS 07; Kerala 11
A. Agoraphobia
B. Acrophobia
C. Claustrophobia
D. Algophobia
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. Agoraphobia

Question: All the following are features of Anorexia Nervosa except :
A. Predominantly seen in females
B. BMI index is higher than normal Population
C. Amenorrhea is rare
D. Malabsorption Syndrome is most common cause
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans.is C (Amenorrhea is rare):Anorexia nervosa often referred to simply as anorexia, is an eating disorder, characterized by low weight, food restriction, fear of gaining weight, and a strong desire to be thin.Complications may include osteoporosis, infeility, and hea damage, among others. Women will often stop having menstrual periods.Amenorrhea is associated with almost a hundred percent of cases of Anorexia Nervosa.

Question: When information memorized afterward is interfered by the information learned earlier, it is called :
A. Retroactive inhibition
B. Proactive inhibition
C. Simple inhibition
D. Inhibition
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Earlier learning interferes with retrieval of new information →  proactive interference.
Newly acquired information interferes with the retrieval of previously learnt information → retroactive inhibition.

Question: Incestuous relationship between mother and son is called as?
A. Oedipus complex
B. Electra complex
C. Family incest
D. None
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. is 'a' i.e., Oedipus complex * In psychoanalysis, the Oedipus complex is a child's desire, that the mind keeps in the unconscious via dynamic repression, to have sexual relations with the parent of the opposite sex (i.e. males attracted to their mothers, and females attracted to their fathers)* The Oedipus complex occurs in the third -- phallic stage (ages 3-6) of the psychosexual development.* Sigmund Freud coined the term "Oedipus complex"* Boys and girls experience the complex differently: boys in a form of castration anxiety & girls in a form of penis envy (Electra complex).

Question: Biochemical etiology of Alzheimer's disease relates to
A. Serotonin
B. Dopamine
C. Acetylcholine
D. GABA
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Neurotransmitters, which are decreased in Alzheimer's disease:- Acetylcholine (most important), norepinephrine, somatostatin, corticotropin.

Question: True statement about Korsakoff's psychosis is -
A. Severe antegrade + Mild retrograde memory defect
B. Mild antegrade + severe retrograde memory defect
C. Only antegrade memory defect
D. Only retrograde memory defect
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Korsakoff syndrome has sever antegrade amnesia and less severe retrograde amnesia.

Question: A 30 year old male was brought for evaluation. The history revealed that the patients 3 year old son died, 5 months back after being hit by a car. At the time of accident, patient was standing nearby and witnessed the accident. For last 5 months, he has been having symptoms of sadness of mood, crying spells, feelings of wohlessness, poor sleep and poor appetite. He has twice thought of killing himself but stopped at the end moment. He has not been attending the office of last 5 months. What is the likely diagnosis:
A. Post traumatic stress disorder
B. Normal grief
C. Major depression
D. Adjustment disorder
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Depression: A major depressive disorder occurs without a history of a manic, mixed, or hypomanic episode. A major depressive episode must last at least 2 weeks DIAGNOSIS: Major Depressive Disorder The DSM-5 diagnostic criteria for major depression Sadness of mood Diminished interest in pleasure Significant weight loss or gain more than 5% in a month Crying spells Feeling of wohlessness Poor sleep (Insomnia or hypersomnia) Suicidal thoughts Psychomotor retardation Fatigue or loss of energy. Five or more of these symptoms present for 2 weeks or more or either depressed mood or loss of interest or pleasure.

Question: Psychosurgery is used in
A. Phobia
B. Generalized anxiety
C. OCD
D. Depression
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Psychosurgery can be used in the treatment of OCD that has become intractable and is not responding to other methods of treatment. The best responders are usually those who have significantly associated depression, although pure obsessives also respond. The main benefit is the marked reduction in associated distress and severe anxiety. (Ref: a sho textbook of psychiatry, Niraj Ahuja, 7th edition, pg no.98)

Question: Morbid jealousy is associated with which addiction?
A. Alcohol
B. Heroin
C. LSD
D. Charas
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. is 'a' i.e., Alcohol Morbid jealousy (Pathological jealousy)* Also referred to as delusional jealously, obsessive jealousy and Othello syndrome. This condition occurs when a person feels an unreasonable fear that a partner has been unfaithful, is presently unfaithful, or plans to be unfaithful.* Morbid jealousy can occur in alcoholism, Schizophrenia, manic phase of bipolar illness, OCD, depression, or anxiety disorder.Also knowAlcoholic paranoia falcohal induced psychotic disorder with delusions)* Alcoholic parania refers to alcohol induced psychotic disorder with delusions. Delusions in alcoholic paranoia are fixed, ie. Alcoholic paranoia is associated with fixed delusions. Patients develop delusion of either persecution or jealousy, accompanied by delusion of reference. Auditary hallucinations may occur but play a minor role.

Question: An 8 year old child has shown of lack of interest in studies for last 6 months. He has frequent quarrels with his parents and has frequent headaches as anexcuse to avoid school. What would be the most appropriate clinical diagnosis in this patient?
A. Rule out migraine
B. Rule out depression
C. Rule out an oppositional defiant disorder
D. Leave him as normal adolescent problem
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Since the person in the question is showing a hostile behavior which is impairing his academic activities for the last 6 months, the most appropriate next step would be to rule out Oppositional defiant disorder.Oppositional defiant disorder is a recurrent pattern of negativistic, hostile or defiant behavior that lasts longer than 6 months and creates disturbances in at least one of the domains of child functioning including social, academic or occupational impairment. The symptoms of this disorder is usually evident around 6-8 years. Ref: Kaplan and Sadock's Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry, 9th Edition, Page 3586, 3580.

Question: How many items are there in Mini mental state examination (MMSE)?
A. 10
B. 15
C. 20
D. 30
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ans.D.30ExplanationMMSE or Folstein test is a simplified form of routine cognitive status examination. It is routinely used to track improvement and deterioration. It includes following points:Orientation to time-5Orientation to place-5Registration-3Attention and calculation-5Recall-3Language-2Repetition-1Complex commands-6Total score-30, score less than 24 indicates cognitive impairment.

Question: Which one of the following disorders is related to sense of unreality?
A. Depersonalization disorder
B. Derealization disorder
C. Delusion
D. Phobias
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. A. Depersonalization disorderDepersonalization:Depersonalization is a sense of unreality or strangeness concerning the self, manifested by feeling detached from and being an outside observer of one's mental processes or body.A patient who experiences depersonalization may describe feeling like things "I have stepped outside of myself and am watching myself doing things".Derealization:Derealization refers to feeling detached from one's environment so that the sense of the reality of the external world is lost.E.g, I feel as if everything is unreal and those around me are actors in a play or two dimensional cardboard figures.

Question: Term psychoanalysis was coined by?
A. Eysenck
B. Freud
C. Jung
D. Adler
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. is 'b' i.e., Freud * The credit for invention of psychoanalysis belong to Sigmund FreudImportant contributors in psychiatryTermCoined by* Demence precoce* Moral Emil* Dementia precox* Kraepelin* Catatonia, cyclotymia* Kahlbaum* Hebephrenia* Hecker* Schizophrenia* Eugen Bleuler* Ambivalence* Eugen Bleuler* Free association* Sigmund Freud* Psychoanalysis, Psychodynamics* Sigmunnd Freud* Id, ego, Superego* Sigmund Freud* Psychiatry* Johann christion Reil

Question: Good prognostic factor for schizophrenia is ?
A. Blunted affect
B. Early onset
C. Presence of depression
D. Male sex
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. is 'c' i.e., Presence of depression Good prognostic factors :- Acute onset; late onset (onset after 35 years of age); Presence of precipitating stressor; Good premorbid adjustment; catatonic (best prognosis) & Paranoid (2nd best); sho duration (< 6 months); Married; Positive symptoms; Presence of depression; family history of mood disorder; first episode; pyknic (fat) physique; female sex; good treatment compliance & good response to treatment; good social suppo; presence of confusion or perplexity; normal brain CT Scan; outpatient treatment.

Question: Biological Methods of Treatments in Psychiatry include all except
A. Electroconvulsive therapy
B. Sub-convulsive ECT
C. Psychosurgery
D. Aversion therapy
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: (D) Aversion therapy # Biological Methods of Treatments in Psychiatry include:> Older methods (no longer used in clinical practice): Malarial treatment for general paralysis of insane Insulin coma therapy Atropine coma therapy Continuous sleep treatment Sub-convulsive ECT Chemical convulsive therapy Sleep deprivation Mega vitamin therapy; Hallucinogens> Presently Used Biological Methods: Electroconvulsive therapy; Psychosurgery# Psychological Treatments (Psychosocial therapies): Psychoanalysis Psychoanalytical Psychotherapy -- Aversion therapy Transactional analysis Others: Hypnosis; Group therapy; Cognitive therapy; Behaviorism; Classical conditioning; Operant conditioning; Dual sex therapy; Psychodrama; Primal therapy; Rational emotive therapy; Primal therapy; will therapy; Gestalt therapy; Existenlial logotherapy; Reciprocal inhibition; Progressive muscular relaxation; Character analysis; Token economy.

Question: Most common hallucination in schjizophrenia is:
A. Auditory
B. Visual
C. Olfactory
D. Tactile
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: A. i.e. Auditory

