Question: 25 year old patient Suspected to have a pneumoperitoneum. Patient is unable to stand. Best x-ray view is
A. Left lateral decubitus view
B. Right lateral decubitus view
C. Supine
D. Prone
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Left lateral decubitus view demonstrates the air between dense shadow of liver and the abdominal wall.

Question: Causes of thickened gallbladder wall on ultrasound examination are all except:
A. Postprandial state
B. Cholecystitis
C. Congestive cardiac failure
D. Kawasaki disease
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ans: D (Kawasaki disease) Ref: Manual of Emergency Critical Care Ultrasound Vicke E Noble. 2nd ed. Pg 156Explanation:Kawasaki disease is associated with hydrops of gallbladder.Gallbladder Wall Thickening A gallbladder wall that is thickened is a sign of inflammation. This is a non-specific finding, and many other pathologic processes, as well as a postprandial gallbladder, can give you falsely elevated measurements.It is important to measure the wall of the anterior gallbladder surface because of the acoustic enhancement artifact mentioned.Because sound waves travel through a fluid-filled structure, no attenuation occurs. Thus, when those sound weaves hit the back of the gallbladder, they will be so strong that they will obscure an accurate picture of the wall thickness.For gallbladder wall thickness, greater than 3 mm is abnormal.Differential for Thickened Gallbladder WallPostprandialRenal failureAscitesHepatitisHypoalbuminemiaHIV/AIDSAdenomyomatosisMultiple myelomaCholecystitisCongestive heart failure

Question: The radiograph of a 32 year old patient is shown below. The patient is asymptomatic and the lesion revealed in the radiograph is an accidental finding. The most likely diagnosis is:
A. Stafne’s bone cavity
B. Radicular Cyst
C. Dentigerous cyst
D. Lateral periodontal cyst
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Radiological signs:
The lesion presents as a chance radiographic finding. It is a round or an ovoid (<3 cm) uniform radiolucency with a well-defined, usually corticated, margin. Stafne’s bone cavity is non-expansile and is found below the mandibular canal just anterior to the angle of the mandible. The location of Stafne’s bone cavity distinguishes it from odontogenic lesions, whose origin is within the alveolar bone.

Question: Adder Head" appearance is found in:
A. X-ray
B. USG
C. IVP
D. CT
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: VP

Question: A 50 year old female patient complains of difficulty in swallowing. Patient gives h/o multiple diagnostic CT-scans of the head and neck region. This patient may be predominantly susceptible to which of the following?
A. Medullary thyroid carcinoma
B. Follicular thyroid carcinoma
C. Anaplastic thyroid carcinoma
D. Papillary thyroid carcinoma
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: The incidence of thyroid carcinomas, predominantly papillary thyroid carcinomas, increases in humans after radiation exposure. There is strong dependence on age at exposure—susceptibility to radiation-induced thyroid cancer is higher in children than adults. There is little evidence for a dose response for individuals exposed during adulthood. Females are 2 to 3 times more susceptible than males to radiogenic and spontaneous thyroid cancers.

Reference: White and Pharoah, Oral radiology, ed 8th, pg-92

Question: Egg shell calcification is seen in all except –
A. Sarcoidosis
B. Silicosis
C. Post irradiation lymphoma
D. Bronchogenic CA
Correct Answer: D

Question: Carotid artery stenosis screening invivo choice is -
A. USG
B. CT
C. MRI
D. Doppler
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ans. is 'd' i.e., Doppler o Color doppler ultrasonography is the screening method of choice (not simple USG : option a is incorrect),o Carotid angiography is the investigation of choice for diagnosis,o MRI is the investigation of choice for demyelinating disorder, e.g. multiple sclerosis.Investigations in nervous systemo Investigation of choice for white matter disease - MRI (CT is second choice),o Investigation of choice of acoustic neuroma - GD enhanced MRIo Best investigation for all brain tumors - Contrast enhanced MRIo Investigation of choice for meningeal carcinomatosis - Contrast (gadolinium) enhanced MRI.o Investigation of choice for posterior fossa tumor - MRIo Investigation of choice for para meningeal rhabdomyosarcoma - MRIo Investigation of choice for nasopharyngeal angiofibroma - Contrast enhanced CT.o Investigation of choice for hydrocephalus in older patients and for low pressure hydrocephalus - MRI.o Investigation of choice for acute (<48hrs) subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) - Non-Contrast CT scan,o Investivation of choice to know the etiology of SAH - Four vessels digital substruction angiography.o Hallmark of SAH - Blood in CSF on lumbar puncture,o Investigation of choice for chronic SAH - MRI.o Primary procedure of choice for evaluating intracranial complications of acute head injury - CT scan,o Best modality for assessing fractures of the skull base, calvarium and facial bone - CT scan,o Investigation of choice for demyelinating disorders MRI.o Investigation of choice for AV malformation and aneurysm - Angiography (MRI angiography or CT angiography),o Investigation of choice for Craniospinal infection - MRIo Investigation of choice for all intrinsic spinal cord lesions; all causes of cord compression - MRI.o Procedure of choice for emergent evaluation of acute intracerebral hemorrhage - CT scan,o Investigation of choice for myelopathy - MRI.o Shape of epidural hematomas on imaging - Biconvex, hyperdense or mixed density.o Shape of acute subdural hematoma on imaging - Crescent-shaped, hyperdense or mixed density ,o Chronic subdural hematoma on imaging - Hypodense.o Most sensitive test for ischaemic stroke - Diffusion weighted (DW) MRI.

Question: All the following are seen in Hyperparathyroidism except
A. Subperiosteal erosion of bone
B. Loss of lamina dura
C. Calvarial thickening
D. Pepper - pot skull
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Calvarial thickening is a feature of Hypoparathyroidism.

Question: All the teeth in patient’s mouth are similarly affected as shown in the radiograph. What is the most likely anomaly?
A. Type 1 dentinal dysplasia
B. Type 2 dentinal dysplasia
C. Taurodontism
D. Amelogenesis imperfecta
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Dentinal dysplasia
Dentinal dysplasia is an inherited condition affecting both dentitions. It is divided into two types: Type I (radicular dentinal dysplasia) and Type II (coronal dentinal dysplasia). It occurs less frequently than dentinogenesis imperfecta.
Clinical features
Type I is the more frequent type. Teeth erupt normally with no obvious abnormality but rapidly develop mobility resulting from limited root support. In type II, the deciduous teeth are similar to those in dentinogenesis imperfecta, whereas the permanent teeth appear normal.
Radiological signs
In Type I, all the teeth, except the canines, have extremely short roots. The roots are conical or blunted. There is pulpal obliteration and the inferior aspects of the crown exhibit linear crescent-shaped radiolucent lines. Periapical radiolucencies are commonly seen associated with non-carious teeth in Type I dentinal dysplasia. In Type II dentinal dysplasia, obliteration of the pulp occurs post eruption in the deciduous dentition. In the permanent dentition, there is alteration in the configuration of the pulp resulting in enlarged pulp chambers extending well down into the root. The pulp contains multiple calcifications.
Ref: Interpreting Dental Radiographs by Keith Horner, Jon Rout and Vivian E Rushton

Question: Which one of the following device conves radioactive emissions to light for detection?
A. Geiger counter
B. Photographic film
C. Scintillation counter
D. Radiotracer
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Scintillation counter: It measures ionizing radiation. The sensor, called a scintillator, consists of a transparent crystal, usually phosphor, plastic, or organic liquid that fluoresces when struck by ionizing radiation. A sensitive photomultiplier tube (PMT) measures the light from the crystal. The PMT is attached to an electronic amplifier and other electronic equipment to count and possibly quantify the amplitude of the signals produced by the photomultiplier. Geiger counter: Is a type of paicle detector that measures ionizing radiation. They detect the emission of nuclear radiation: alpha paicles, beta paicles or gamma rays. It detects radiation by ionization produced in a low pressure gas in a Geiger Muller tube.

Question: A dense persistent nephrogram may be seen in all of the following except:
A. Acute ureteral obstruction
B. Systemic hypeension
C. Severe hydronephrosis
D. Dehydration
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: B i.e. Systemic hypeension

Question: Which is not echogenic while doing ultrasonography-
A. Bile
B. Gas
C. Bone
D. Gall stones
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Bile and urine are least echogenic.
Bone, gas, and organ boundaries are most echogenic.

Question: Tigroid white matter on MRI is seen in?
A. Pantothenate kinase deficiency
B. Pelizaeus-merzbacher disease
C. Neuroferritinopathy
D. Aceruloplasminemia
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: The tigroid pattern/ leopard skin sign occurs on MRI head is seen in Pelizaeus-merzbacher disease, due to creation of islands of perivascular myelin due patchy myelin deficiency. It is a rare hypomyelination syndrome caused by mutation in proteolipid protein, PLP 1 gene at chromosome Xq22. Child will show slow psychomotor development with nystagmus(pendular eye movements), hypotonia, extrapyramidal symptoms and spasticity. Tigroid pattern is also seen in metachromatic leucodystrophy.

Question: Advantage of brachytherapy – a) Non-invasiveb) Less radiation hazard to normal tissuec) Max.radiation to diseased tissued) Can be given in all malignanciese) Doesn't require trained personnel
A. a
B. c
C. ac
D. bc
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: As the radiotherapy source is placed directly in contact with tumor, maximum radiation exposure occurs to tumor tissue with relative sparing of adjacent normal tissue.
Brachytherapy is invasive and requires trained personnel.
Brachytherapy can be used in most (not all) of the malignancies where radiotherapy is the component of treatment.

Question: Neonate triangular cord sign on USG is seen in -
A. Galactosemia
B. Biliary atresia
C. Hepatitis
D. None
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. is 'b' i.e., Biliary atresiao Triangular cord sign is seen in biliary ateria due to fibrosis.

Question: Double bubble sign is seen in -
A. Ladd's band
B. Annular pancreas
C. Duodenal atresia
D. All of the above
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ans. is 'd' i.e., All of the above o Double bubble sign is seen in duodenal atresia, duodenal web, deudenal stenosis, Ladd's band, Annular pancreas, Malrotation of gut, preduodenal vein.Single Bubble signCongenita] hypertrophic pyloric stenosisDouble Bubble signDuodenal atresiaDuodenal webDuodena] stenosisLadd's bandAnnular pancreasMalrotation of gutPreduodenal veinTriple Bubble signJejunal or proximal ileum atresiaMultiple Bubble signIleal atresia

Question: An 18 year old male patient presented to the clinic with pain and swelling in the lower jaw. Intraoral examination
revealed localized gingival bleeding in the right posterior region. On palpation, pulsations can be appreciated. Lesions are also appreciated on the frontal bone on a radiograph. Which condition is present in this patient?
A. Vascular malformation
B. Cherubism
C. Eosinophilic granuloma
D. Brown tumor
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Vascular malformation (VM) in bone occurs more frequently than the central hemangioma (CH) of bone. Some 35% of VMs occur in bone, whereas CHs of bone are rare. The CH of bone is a benign tumor that rarely occurs in the jaws; it occurs more frequently in the skull and vertebrae. It may be congenital or traumatic in origin and may be difficult to differentiate from VM. The usual complaint of a patient with a VM or CH is of a slow-growing asymmetry of the jaw or localized gingival bleeding. Numbness and tenderness or pain may also be described. This solitary tumor is found approximately twice as often in female patients, and about 65% occur in the mandible. Some tumors demonstrate pulsation and bruits. Paresthesia is occasionally a feature.

Question: Best investigation to see calcification is:
A. CT
B. MRI
C. X-ray
D. USG
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans: A (CT ?) Ref: Harrison !v Principles of internal medicine.18th edition.Explanation:CT is the best technique to detect pericardial calcification; however, overpenetrated films, conventional tomography, fluoroscopy, and MRI may be helpful.Plain radiographs have poor sensitivity for detection of coronary calcification and have a reported accuracy as low as 42%High-quality mammography is the best diagnostic tool for the identification of breast calcifications.

Question: Which of the following causes BOTH superior and inferior rib-notching in a chest radiograph?
A. NF-1
B. Blalock Taussig shunt
C. SVC occlusion
D. Coarctation of aoa
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Superior rib notching -Polio -Restrictive lung disease -Neurofibromatosis -Connective tissue disease -Osteogenesis imperfecta Inferior rib notching -Thrombosis of aoa -Coarctation of aoa -Blalock Taussig shunt -Occlusion of subclan aery -Pulmonary AV malformation Both Superior and inferior rib notching -NF-1 -Hyperparathyroidism

Question: which is not a radiographic finding of CHF
A. Kerley B lines
B. Kerley A lines
C. Cardiomegaly
D. Oligemia
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: ref : harrisons 21st ed

Question: Abdominal ultra-sonography in a 3 year old boy show a solid circumscribed hypoechnoic renal mass. Most likely diagnosis is -
A. Wilm's tumor
B. Renal cell carcinoma
C. Mesoblastic nephroma
D. Oncocytoma
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Amongst the given options only Wilms tumor is common at 3 years of age :-
	 Wilm's tumor                  → young children (mean 3 years)
	Mesoblastic nephroma     → < 1 year
	Renal cell carcinoma        → > 40 years
	Oncocytoma                    → 25-95 years (mean 65)

Question: I/V contrast is not used in –
A. HRCT
B. MRI
C. IVP
D. Myelography
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: IV contrast agent is given in :-


X-ray based investigation (Radiocontrast agent) :- Radiography (simple x-ray), CT-Scan.
MRI (MR contrast agents).
Ultrasound (USG contrast agents).


IVP (intravenous pyelography) as the name suggests, the contrast agent is given intravenously.
In myelography, the contrast agent is injected into subarachnoid space.

Question: Investigation of choice for intramedullary SOL is -
A. MRI
B. USG
C. CT
D. X-ray
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. is 'a' i.e., MRI o Investigation of choice for intramedullary space occupy lesion is MRI.

Question: 'Bird beak' appearance on barium swallow is feature of?
A. Achalasia cardia
B. Diffuse esophageal spasm
C. Caustic stricture
D. Carcinoma of the esophagus
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. A. Achalasia cardia. (Harrison's Medicine, 18th ch. 292; /Fig. 292-5).Achalasia cardia- Megaesophagus/sigmoid esophagus- "Bird beak" deformity- Absence of primary peristalsis below level of cricopharyngeus- Hurst phenomenon (temporary transit through cardia when hydrostatic pressure of barium column is above toxic LES pressure)- Vigorous achalasia (numerous tertiary contractions in non-dilated distal esophagus of early achalasia).Hiatus hernia- Epiphrenic bulge- >4 longitudinal coarse thick gastric folds above gastroesophageal junction or in the suprahiatal pouch- A Schatzki or B ring if present, is pathognomonic of a hiatal hernia because it marks the junction between squamous and columnar epithelium and represents the Z line.- Distance between B ring and hiatal margin > 2 cm- Peristalsis causes above hiatus.Schatzki ring (B ring/Lower esophageal mucosal ring, seen as a thin, web-like annular constriction at the esophagogastric junction is associated with a small hiatal hernia.Lye stricture(alkali/caustic strictures) - Long, tight and smooth stricturePeptic stricture- Short and tubular narrowing.Carcinoma oesophagus- Typical annular narrowing with overhang- ing margins and destruction of the mucosa.- 'Rat-tail' esophagus- Shouldering signLeomyoma/GIST- Smooth filling defect with right angles of origin from the esophageal wall (Submucosal smooth lesion)Cytomegalovirus esophagitis- iant ovoid flat ulcers (vasculitis of submucosal vessels)- Gastroesophageal junction with adjacent part of stomach is commonly affected.Herpes esophagitis- Discrete superficial punctate/linear serpentine/stellate/diamond shaped ulcers.Candidial esophagitis- Cobble stone mucosa- 'Shaggy' contour of the esophagus with small diffuse superficial ulcers- Irregular plaque-like filling defectsTertiary esophageal contractions (presbyesophagus, diffuse esophageal spasm, neuromuscular diseases)- "Corkscrew" appearance- "Rosary-bead/Shish kebab" configuration- "Yo-Yo" motion of bariumScleroderma- Esophageal shortening- Sliding hiatus hernia- Hidebound esophagus

Question: Characterstic X Ray finding in ASD is:
A. Enlarged left ventricle
B. Enlarged left atria
C. Pulmonary pletheora
D. PAH
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: C i.e. Pulmonary plethora

Question: Isotope (s) used in high dose rate brachytherapy – a) lr192b) Co–60c) Cs–l33d) Ra 226 e) Pd103
A. ac
B. a
C. ab
D. bc
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: "Although cobalt - 60 and cesium - 137 have been used in the past, iridium - 192 is the most commonly used radioisotope in HDR brachytherapy".                                                                       — The physics of radiation therapy
Note - Cs-137 is used in HDR brachytherapy, while option c i.e. Cs - 133 (not Cs - 137).

Question: For pericardial calcifications, which is the best investigation-
A. MRI
B. Transesophageal echocardiography
C. USG
D. CT scan
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Calcification anywhere in the body - IOC is CT scan Except for gall stones - IOC is USG So, for pericardial calcifications, the best investigation is CT scan. Figure: An incidental discovery of focal calcific plaque within the visceral pericardium. The patient was asymptomatic.

Question: Which of the following is not a CT feature ofAdrenal adenoma –
A. Low attenuation
B. Homogenous density and well defined borders
C. Enhances rapidly, contrast stays in it for a relatively longer time and washes out late
D. Calcification is rare
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Adrenal adenoma on contrast-enhanced CT/MRI shows rapid uptake and relatively rapid washout of contrast material than do non adenomasQ.
Adenoma: CT features

Well defined/sharply defined 
<5 cm in size
Low attenuation (<10 HU) due to lipid content
Mild homogenous enhancement
Relatively rapid washout of contrast material (due to lack of large interstitial spaces
Relatively rapid washout is characteristic of adenoma

Question: Bilateral spider leg sign on IVP is suggestive of:
A. Polycystic kidney
B. Hydronephrosis
C. Hypernephroma
D. Renal stones
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. Polycystic kidney

Question: Mesencephalo-oculo-facial-angiomatosis is seen in:
A. KTW Syndrome
B. NF-1 & 2
C. Sturge-Weber syndrome
D. Wyburn-Mason syndrome
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: D i.e. Wyburn-Mason syndrome - Wyburn-Mason syndrome (or Bonnet-Dechaume Blanc syndrome mesencephalo-oculo-facial or mesencephalo-optico retinal angiomatosis syndrome) is characterized by neuro (mesencephalo) - optico / oculo / retinal - facial angiomatosis (vascular-malformations). - Wyburn-Mason syndrome presents with telangiectasia of skinQ (i.e cutaneous vascular nevi) on face + retinal cirsoid aneurysmQ and aerio-venous malformation (AVM) involving the visual pathways and midbrainQ (= entire optic tract = optic nerve, thalamus, geniculate bodies and calcarine coex). The lesions are typically unilateral mostly. It may be a/w AVMs of postrior fossa, neck, mandible/maxilla presenting in childhood. Rendu-Osler-Weber syndrome (hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia) is AD neurocutaneous syndrome that result in a variety of systemic fibrovascular dysplasia (i.e. telangiectasia, AVM, AV hemangioma/fistula, and aneurysm) affecting mucous membrane, skin, lung, brain and GI tract-Q. Telangiectasi is primarily found in the skin & mucous membranes. AVM and fistula are found manly in liver > brain > lung > spine. Aneurysm can invovle any size vessel. Frequent bleeding into mucous membrane, skin, lungs, genitourinary and gestrointestinal system is d/ t vascular weakness. Klippel-Trenaunay syndrome (KTS) is angio-osteo-hyperophy i.e. hyperophy of soft tissue & over growth of bone IR abnormalitie of finger/toes /limb and venous varicosities d/t large angiomatous nevus (AVM). Several KTS patients exhibit CNS findings of Sturg-Weber syndrome and are called Klippel-TrenaunayWeber syndrome. They exhibit cutaneous angiomata, soft tissue /bony hyperophy and leptomeningeal vascular malformation.

Question: Accordian sign is seen in
A. Pseudomembranous colitis
B. Intussusception
C. Ileocecal TB
D. Ischemic colitis
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: The 'Accordion sign' (also known as 'conceina sign') is seen on CT examinations of the abdomen Refers to the similarity between the thickened oedematous wall of Pseudomembranous colitis and the folds of an accordion. This appearance is the result of hyperaemic enhancing mucosa stretched over markedly thickened submucosal folds. Also seen when contrast is trapped between oedematous haustral folds and pseudomembranes formed on the luminal surface of the colon.

Question: Egg on side appearance of heart is seen in the radiograph of?
A. TAPVC
B. TGA
C. ASD
D. VSD
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. (b) TGARef: Sutton 7thed different pages. Pediatrics Radiology: The Requisites by Johan G. Blickman, Bruce R. Parker; M.D. Patrick D. Barnes p-52

Question: Calcification of interveebral disc is seen in -
A. Gout
B. Rheumatoid ahritis
C. Alkaptonuria
D. Psoriasis
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Interveebral disc calcification seen in : Ochronosis /Alkaptonuria Ankylosing spondylitis Pseudogout Hemochromatosis Hypervitaminosis D Transient interveebral disc calcification Juvenile chronic ahritis Hyperparathyroidism Amyloidosis Poliomyelitis Acromegaly

Question: All are cause of Respiratory distress in newborn and Ipsilateral shift of mediastinum
A. Alelectasis
B. Lung collapse
C. Pulmonary hypoplasia
D. Hyaline membrane disease
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: No mediastinal shift in hyaline membrane disease.

Question: Most common radiation induced cancer:
A. Thyroid Carcinoma
B. Breast Carcinoma
C. Leukemia
D. Sarcomas
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Leukemia is most common radiation induced cancer.
Others: Thyroid, Breast Carcinoma

Question: What is seen in the X-ray of femur below
A. Sunburst calcification
B. Onion peel effect
C. Codmann triangle
D. Bone marrow invasion
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: .

Question: The specific name of the anomaly shown in the following radiograph is:
A. Dens in dente
B. Dilated odontome
C. Dens invaginatus
D. Ghost tooth
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Dens in Dente 
(Dens invaginatus, dilated composite odontome)
The  ‘dens in dente’  is a  developmental variation which is thought to arise as a result of an invagination in the surface of tooth crown before calcification has occurred. Several causes of this condition have been proposed. These include increased localized external pressure, focal growth retardation, and focal growth stimulation in certain areas of the tooth bud. The permanent maxillary lateral incisors are the teeth most frequently involved,  and in the majority of cases the  ‘dens in dente’ appears to represent simply an accentuation in the development of the lingual pit.
Radiological signs
Dens in dente represent a tooth-shaped, enamel-covered mass within the crown and/or root of the tooth but which may traverse the length of the tooth. Dilated odontome represents the most extreme form of this anomaly and exhibits a grossly altered morphology that is internally outlined by a dense linear radiopacity. In both cases, the apical region may or may not display an open apex and there may be associated adjacent apical rarefaction.

Question: Gamma Rays Are used in which Diagnostic Modality ?
A. Fluoroscopy
B. CT Scan
C. MRI
D. Bone scan
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Gamma Rays are used in Radioisotope studies/scintigraphy studies Bone scan is a radioisotope study done using Tc99m -MDP to detect skeletal metastasis Fluoroscopy and CT scan uses Xrays Radiowaves are used in MRI

Question: Distribution of functional renal tissue is seen by –
A. DMSA
B. DTPA
C. MAG3 – Tc99
D. 1123 iodocholesterol
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Static renal scintigraphy (Tc-99 DMSA) can be used to locate functional renal mass.

Question: The braggs peak is found in:
A. Proton beam
B. Microwave
C. UV Rays
D. Infrared
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ref: Internet source: Medscape RadiologyExplanation:Bragg peak is a concept utilized in giving focused radiotherapy using ionizing radiation to a tumor without affecting the normal healthy surrounding tissuesOptions B.C and D are examples of non-ionizing radiation.Bragg's peakThe Bragg peak is a peak on the Bragg curve which plots the energy loss of ionizing radiation during its travel through matter.For protons, a-rays and other ion rays, the peak occurs immediately before the particles come to rest. This is called Bragg peak.When a fast charged particle moves through matter, it ionizes atoms of the material and deposits a dose along its path.A peak occurs because the interaction cross section increases as the charged particle's energy decreases.Absorption of a beam of energetic photons (X- ravs) which is entirely different in nature; the curve is mainly exponential.The phenomenon is exploited in particle therapy of cancer, to concentrate the effect of light ion beams on the tumor being treated while minimizing the effect on the surrounding healthy tissue.Monenergistic proton beam with the sharp peak is widened by increasing the range of energies, so that a larger tumor volume can be treated.This can be achieved by using variable thickness attenuators like spinning wedges.

Question: Deleterious effect of ultrasound on small organism is:
A. Ionisation
B. Vacoulation
C. Cavitation
D. Disintegration
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. Cavitation

Question: A male was brought unconscious to the hospital with external injuries. CT shows no midline shift, but basal cisterns were full (compressed) with multiple small haemorrhage. The most probable diagnosis is:
A. Brain contusion
B. Diffuse axonal injury
C. Subdural hemorrhage
D. Multiple infarct
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: B i.e. Diffuse axonal injuries Diffuse axonal injuries (DAI) - shearing injuries caused by sudden rotational or accelerating / decelerating forces. Patient typically lose consciousness at the time of impactQ. On CT small petechial hemorrhages are seenQ

Question: Snowman's heart sign on chest X-ray is seen in -
A. Ebstein anomaly
B. Total anomalous pulmonary venous connection (TAPVC)
C. Tetrology of Fallot
D. Transposition of great vessels
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. is 'b' i.e., Total anomalous pulmonary venous connection (TAPVC) o "Snowman" or "figure of 8" or "cottage loaf sign" is characteristic of supracardiac TAP VC.Cardiac configrationo "Boot-shaped" heart (cour en sabot)Fallot's tetralogyo "Egg on side" heart ("egg in cup" heart)Transposition of great arterieso "Egg in cup" HeartConstrictive pericarditiso "Snowman" sign ("figure of 8, or cottage loaf' sign)Supracardiac TAPVCo "Ground - glass" appearance of lungObstructive TAPVCo "Sitting-duck" heartPersistent truncus arteriosuso "Water-bottle" or flasked shaped or money bag heartPericardial effusion, hypothyroidismo "Box-shaped" heartTricuspid atresia, Ebstein's anomalyo Tubular heartAddison's disease, emphysemao "Tear -drop" heartChronic emphysemao "Cor-triatum"Pulmonary vein obstructiono "Jug handle" appearancePrimary pulmonary hypertensiono "Pentagon-shaped" heartMitral incompetenceo "Triangular-shaped" heartConstrictive pericarditis

Question: Which of the following ultrasound marker is associated with greatest increased risk for Trisomy 21 in fetus?
A. Echogenic foci in hea
B. Hyperechogenic bowel
C. Choroid plexus cysts
D. Nuchal edema
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ans. Nuchal edema

Question: Hydrocephalus in infant is best diagnosed by
A. USG cranium
B. CT scan head
C. Encephalogram
D. Lumbar-puncture
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. a (USG cranium). (Ref. Grainger, Diagnostic Radiology, 4th ed., 2469)Cranial ultrasound of Infants# USG cranium is best method to diagnose hydrocephalus through the anterior and posterior fontanalles.# Progression of hydrocephalus can be estimated by comparison with previous studies.# USG is also helpful in following ventricular decompression in patients treated for hydrocephalus.# Neonatal hydrocephalus can also be evaluated by Doppler to assess indirectly intracranial pressure and help to determine the need for shunt placement.Cranial CT# CT enable us to evaluate the brain structure and ventricular size by noninvasive highly reliable technique.# But due to the ionizing radiations hazard, CT as a screening investigation is less preferable.Qhstretk. (Fetal) Cranial ultrasound# Obstretic ultrasound study is one of the best methods for antenatal diagnosis of hydrocephalus as it is noninvasive & hazard free not only to fetus as well as to mother. However assessment prior to GA of 20 weeks may be difficult, as ventricles constitute a large portion of cranial vault.# Signs suggestive of fetal hydrocephalus on obstretic USG study are:- Atrial size > 10 mm- Dangling "Choroid plexus" sign- BPD > 95th percentile- +- PolyhydramniosEducational points:# Lemon sign:- Concave/linear frontal contour abnormality located at coronal suture strongly associated with spina bifida.# Banana sign:- Cerebellum wrapped around posterior brainstem + obliteration of cisterna magna secondary to small posterior fossa + downward traction of spinal cord in Chiari II malformation.# Key points about Obstetric color Doppler study:- Assessment of flow in MCA is important parameter to diagnose fetal anemia.- Assessment of flow in umbilical vessels is important parameter to diagnose fetoplacental insufficiency.- Reduced diastolic flow in umbilical artery is the earliest sign of fetoplacental insufficiency.- Reversal of flow in umbilical artery (as well as pulsatile flow in umbilical vein) is the most ominous sign and may indicate impending fetal death.

Question: Best test to detect pneumoperitoneum is:
A. Chest X-ray
B. X-ray abdomen in supine position
C. X-ray abdomen in supine position
D. X-ray abdomen in lateral decubitus
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: X-ray abdomen in lateral decubitus

Question: A 22 years old man presents with a solitary 2 cm space occupying lesion of mixed echogenecity in the right lobe of the liver on USG. The rest of the liver is normal. Which of the following test should be done next?
A. Ultrasound guided biopsy of the lesion
B. Hepatic scintigraphy
C. Hepatic angiography
D. Contrast enhanced CT scan of the liver
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: MRI as the diagnostic test of choice for hepatic hemangioma at most centers. Nuclear medicine studies may be used to confirm the diagnosis when a probable hemangioma is detected on ultra-sonography. Nuclear medicine studies may also help to clarify the nature of a lesion when the diagnosis is equivocal on CT or MRI. Percutaneous biopsy of a hepatic hemangioma carries an increased risk of hemorrhage. Liver biopsy is contraindicated in most circumstances where a hemangioma is high in the differential diagnosis of a hepatic mass. Hepatic angiography: The diagnostic accuracy of noninvasive tests has obted the need for hepatic aeriography in most cases.

Question: Dye used for myelography
A. Conray 320
B. Myodil
C. Dianosil
D. Iopaoic acid
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: contrast agents used for myelography are : Iohexol Iopamidol Metrizamide Myodil

Question: Bird of Prey" sign is seen in the radiographic barium examination of:
A. Gastric volvulus
B. Intussusception
C. Sigmoid volvulus
D. Caeca! volvulus
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Sigmoid volvulus

Question: Which of the following techniques use piezoelectric crystals -
A. Ultrasonography
B. X-ray diffraction
C. NMR imaging
D. Xeroradiography
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. is 'a' i.e., Ultrasonography o Ultrasonography is based on piezoelectric effect.o MRI is based on gyeromagneticproperty of proton (H+).Ultrasonography (USG) / Ultrasoundo USG is performed with the pulse-echo technique. By the virtue of piezoelectric effect in the ultrasound probe (or transducer), electric energy is converted to sound energy that is transmitted into patient's tissues. The US transducer (probe) then becomes a receiver, detecting echo of sound energy reflected from tissue.o The US transducer (probe) then becomes a receiver, detecting echo of sound energy reflected from tissue.o The ultrasound transducer uses the principle or property of piezoelectricity.o Quartz is a naturally occuring peizoelectric material.o Currently, Lead Zirconate titanate (PZT) is the most widely used material in the ultrasound tranducer/probes

Question: Hockey stick appearance on echo is a feature of
A. Mitral stenosis
B. Mitral incompetence
C. Aoic stenosis
D. Aoic regurgitation
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Echocardiographic features of mitral stenosis:-Thickened and calcified mitral leaflets and subvalvular apparatus -Decreased E-F slope (M-mode)-Hockey stick appearance of the anterior mitral leaflet in diastole(long axis view)-Immobility of the posterior mitral leaflet (a similar appearance can be seen in hypereosinophilia or ergot use)-Fish mouth orifice in the sho axis view-Increased LA size, with the potential for thrombus formationDynamic CT: the Restricted opening of the thickened valve from commissural fusion (especially with rheumatic valve disease), valve calcification, or both results in a "fish-mouth" appearance on sho-axis images. Bowing of a thickened and fibrotic anterior leaflet during diastole may result in a "hockey-stick" appearance which is best seen on two- or four-chamber images(Ref: The echo manual by Jae K Oh; J B Seward; A Jamil Tajik, page no 202)

Question: Which of the following is a radiolucent stone?
A. Uric acid
B. Oxalate
C. Cysteine
D. Triple phosphate
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans: a (Uric acid) Ref: Bailey and Love, 24th ed, p. 1317Pure uric acid stones are radiolucent and appear in an excretory urogram as filling defects.Uric acid stones if contain calcium, will cast a faint radiological shadow.Examples for radiolucent stones* Uric acid* Dihydroxy adenine* Orotic acid* Xanthine* Allopurinol* Triamterine and Indinavir induced stones.

Question: Radiological feature of Mitral stenosis is are
A. Double contour of right hea border
B. Straightening of left hea border
C. Splaying of carinal angle
D. All
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: A, B, C i.e. Double contour of right hea border, Straightening of left hea border, Splaying of carinal angle

Question: Which of the following indicates radiograph contrast induced nephropathy?
A. Increased creatinine levels
B. Decreased urine output
C. Increased bilirubin
D. Decreased bilirubin
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans.Increased creatinine levels

Question: Most reliable method of diagnosing pulmonary embolism is: September 2004
A. Plain skiagram
B. Perfusion
C. Electrocardiography
D. Angiography
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ans. D i.e. Angiography Pulmonary angiography has been now replaced by CT and MR angiography

Question: Ultrasound scanning of a fetus shows asymmetric growth retardation. It may be associated with the following pathology:
A. Anencephaly
B. Trisomy 18
C. Congenital rubella syndrome
D. Placenta pre
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Asymmetric intrauterine growth retardation (IUGR) is seen in chronic placental insufficiency due to inadequate substrate transfer. The fetus is affected in later months during the phase of cellular hyperophy. The placental pathology includes, Placenta prae Abruption Circumvallate Infarction Mosaicism Poor placentation Symmetric IUGR is seen in genetic disease or infection. The fetus is affected from the noxious effect very early in the phase of cellular hyperplasia. Ref: Textbook of Obstetrics by DC Dutta, 6th edition, Page 463-464.

Question: Which of the following facilitates comparison between different radiations?
A. Rad
B. Rem
C. Quality factor exposure
D. Roentgen
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: EQUIVALENT (RADIATION-WEIGHTED) DOSE:
The equivalent dose (HT) is used to compare the biologic effects of different types of radiation on a tissue or organ. Particulate types of radiation have a high LET and are more damaging to tissue than radiation with low LET, such as x rays. This relative biologic effectiveness of different types of radiation is called  the radiation-weighting  factor (WR).
The unit of equivalent dose is the sievert (Sv). For diagnostic x-ray examinations, 1 Sv equals 1 Gy. 
The traditional unit of equivalent dose is the rem (roentgen equivalent man); 1 Sv  equals 100 rem.
Oral Radiology, Principles and Interpretation / Stuart C. White, Michael J. Pharoah - 7th ed - pg - 15

Question: All correlates with USG findings of congenital pyloric stenosis except:
A. > 95% accuracy
B. Segment length >16mm
C. Thickness >4mm
D. High gastric residues
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: D i.e. High gastric residuesUltrasonography is the investigation of choice to confirm diagnose of hyperophic pyloric stenosis with accuracy > 95% (approching almost 100%)Q. USG visualizes thickened and elongated pyloric canalQ. USG criteria for diagnosis include >16 mm pyloric length and >4mm pyloric muscle wall thicknessQ. Gastric residues are low b/o recurrent emesisQ.The hyperophied muscle project into gastric antrum. There is a constant assocaition with hyperplasia of antral mucosa.- It is a common developmental condition (3 in 1000 live bihs), affecting boys more than girls (M:F = 4/5 :1)Q. There is a familial predisposition.Affected infant usually presents between 2-6 weeks of age, with projectile non bilious vomiting (D/D include pylorospasm, hiatus hernia & preampullary duodenal stenosis). HPS is never seen beyond 3 months of age except in premature infants in whom enteral feeding has been staed late.- Despite the recurrent vomiting, child has a voracious appetite that leads to cycle of feeding & vomiting that invariably results in severe dehydration, hypochloremichypokalemic metabolic alkalosis with eventual decrease in urine PHDiagnosis can be made clinically on the basis of history and palpation of an olive mass in the subhepatic region (right upper quadrant) and presence of visible gastric (antral peristaltic) wavesQ.Diagnosis of the HPS can be established (confirmed) by either USG (method of choice)Q or barium study.Pyloric signs includeString sign, is passing of thin barium streak through narrowed & elongated pyloric canal. It is most specific sign.Pyloric canal is almost always curved upward posteriorlyDouble/triple track sign or double string sign is produced by barium caught between crowded mucosal folds in pyloric canal overlying the hyperophied muscle & parallel lines may be seen.Diamond sign or twining recess is transient triangular tent like cleft/niche in midpoion of pyloric canal with apex pointing inferiorly secondary to mucosl bulging between two seperated hyperophied muscles on the greater curvature side of pyloric canal.Apple core lesion, pyloric segment looks like apple core with under cutting of distal antral & proximal duodenal bulb.Antral signs includePyloric teat sign is out pouching along lesser curvature b/o disruption of antral peristalsis.Shoulder sign is impression of hyperophied muscle on distended gastric antrum.Antral beaking is noted as thick muscle narrows the barium column as it enters the pyloric canal.Olive pit sign is impression of pyloric muscle upon antrum seen as tiny amount of barium at orifice.Caterpillar sign is gastric hyperperistaltic waves.Kirklin mushroom sign is indentation of base of duodenal bulb.Ultrasonography (USG)It is the method of choice to directly visualize the HPS. The examination is typically performed with a high frequency linear transducer (>5MH2) (as the pylorus & duodenum are very superficial in an infant) with infant in right posterior oblique position (to move any fluid present in fundus into antral & pylorus region. The stomach should not be emptied prior to examination as this makes identification of antropyloric area difficult. If fluid is administered to make visualization better, it should be removed at the end of examination to prevent vomiting/aspiration. Features include)Doughnut appearance/Bull's eye or target sign is hypoechoic (black) ring of hyperophied pyloric muscle around echogenic (reflective) mucosa & submucosa on cross /transverse section images.Shoulder/cervix-sign is indentation of hyperophied muscle on fluid filled gastric antrum on longitudinal section.Antral nipple sign is protrusion (evagination) of redundant pyloric mucosa into distended antrum.Double tract sign refers to fluid trapped in center of elongated pyloric canal is seen as two sonolucent streaks in center.Exaggerated peristattic waves & delayed gastric emptying of fluid into duodenumElongated pylorus with thickened muscles (most specific) is indicated by Length > 15mm, muscle thickness >3mm and transverse serosa to serosa diameter >15mm is consistent with HPS. At least 2 values should be positive. A thickness pylorospasm is transient & mostly resolve in 30 minutes and there is considerable variation in measurement or image appearance with time during thickness. (GI imaging) Pyloric canal length 16-17min, muscle wall thickness 2 3-3.2mmQ, pyloric volume > 1.4cm3, pyloric transverse diameter 13mm with pyloric canal closed and length (mm) + 3.64x + 3.64 x thickness (mm) >25 (Wolfgang) Pyloric length >16mm & muscle thickness > 4mm (Swaz)

Question: All the following will appear caries in an X-ray except
A. Acrylic resin
B. Calcium hydroxide
C. ZOE
D. Composite
Correct Answer: C

Question: Low dose radiotherapy is given for:
A. Seminoma
B. Malignant melanoma
C. Osteosarcoma
D. Chondrosarcoma
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. Seminoma

Question: The technique employed in radiotherapy to counteract the effect of tumour motion due to breathing is known as
A. Arc technique
B. Modulation
C. Gating
D. Shunting
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Gating Respiratory gating : It is a technique in radiotherapy in which the radiation is applied during that phase of respiratory cycle in which the tumour is in the best range. This is to prevent unnecessary radiation exposure to normal structures.

Question: Which of the following statements about contrast in radiography is true -
A. Ionic monomers have three iodine atoms per two paicles in solution
B. High osmolar contrast agents may be ionic or non ionic
C. Gadolinum may cross the blood brain barrier
D. Iohexol is a high osmolar contrast media
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: option A is correct : Ionic monomers have three iodine atoms per two paicles in solution Ionic dimers and non ionic monomers have three iodine atoms per one paicle in solution Non ionic dimers have six iodine atoms per one paicle in solution option B is incorrect : High osmolar agents (ionic monomers) are only ionic low osmolar agents may be ionic or non ionic iso osmolar agents are only non ionic option C is incorrect : Gadolinium does not cross Blood brain barrier (BBB) option D is incorrect : Iohexol is low osmolar (non ionic monomer)

Question: For teletherapy, isotopes commonly used are
A. 1-123
B. Cs-137
C. Co-60
D. Tc-99
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: C i.e. Co-60

Question: For shield (mould) in eye tumors which of the following is preferred?
A. Iodine-131
B. Gold-198
C. Strontium-90
D. Phosphorous-32
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ans. D. Phosphorous-32Some useful radionuclides used in clinical radiotherapyRadionuclideEnergy Half-life Medical uses* Radium-2260.83mv1625 yearsfor brachytherapy but not used now a days* Cobalt-601.25mv5.4 yearsteletherapy & brachytherapy* Caesium-1370.666mv30 yearsteletherapy & brachytherapy* Iridium-1920.380mv72 daysbrachytherapy only* Iodine-1250.030mv60 daysbrachytherapy* Iodine-1310.61mv8 daysunsealed radioiodine for thyroid cancer Rx* Gold-1980.412mv 2.7 days brachytherapy* Strontium-902.24mv30 yearsfor shield (mould) in eye tumors* Phosphorous-321.71mv14 daysintraperitoneal

Question: Point B in treatment of Ca cervix corresponds to
A. Mackenrodts ligament
B. Obturator Lymph node
C. Isheal tuberosity
D. Round ligament
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: B i.e. Obturator Lymph node

Question: Best investigation for pericardial effusion is -
A. MRI
B. CT
C. X ray
D. Echocardiography
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ans. is 'd' i.e., Echocardiography Investigations o Investiation of choice to identify individual cardiac chamber enlargement - 2D-echocardiography. o Inv estigation of choice for pericardial effusion - 2D-echocardiography. o Investigation of choice for valvular heart disease - 2D-echocardiography. o Investigation of choice for cardiomyopathy -2D-echocardiography. o Investigation of choice for cardiac temponade - 2D-echocardiography. o Investigation of choice for aortic dissection in stable patient - MRl. o Investigation of choice for aortic dissection in unstable patient - TEE. o Investigation of choice for ventricular function and size - Echocardiography o Investigation of choice for congenital heart disease - Echocardiography, o Investigation of choice for pericardial defect - MRI. o Investigation of choice for radiotherapy/chemotherapy induced myocardial damage - Endomyocardial biopsy o Investigation of choice for myocardial perfusion and viability (reversible ischemia) - Nuclear cardiac imaging (thallium scan or Technetium scan) o Most sensitive investigation for air embolism - Trans-esophageal echocardiography. o Second most sensitive investigation for air embolism - PrecordiaJ Doppler o Best x-ray view for right atrial enlargement - Left anterior oblique view, o Best x-ray view for left atrial enlargement - Right anterior oblique view with barium swallow

Question: Cells are most sensitive to radiation in:
A. G2 phase
B. G1 phase
C. G1 phase and early S phase
D. G2 phase and late S phase
Correct Answer: A

Question: Hampton's line is feature of
A. Benign ulcers
B. Malignant ulcers
C. Both
D. None of the above
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: 'Hampton's line' :- - is thin radiolucent line seen at the neck of a gastric ulcer in barium studies - it is seen in benign gastric ulcer - it's caused by thin line of mucosa overhaning ulcer's crater Hampton's line Carman Meniscus sign - (in Malignant gastric ulcer) Duodenal ulcer: - is associated with increased acid secretion caused by higher incidence of H.Pylori infection - duodenum is often deformed along its inferior margin - chronic gastric ulcer gives Trifoliate appearance

Question: The most common radio-opaque mass at root apex of a vital tooth is due to:
A. Hypercementosis
B. Condensing osteitis
C. Periapical cemental dysplasia
D. True cementoma
Correct Answer: C

Question: 76 year old man presents with lytic lesion in the vebrae. X-Ray skull showed multiple punched out lesions. The diagnosis is
A. Metastasis
B. Multiple myeloma
C. Osteomalacia
D. Hyperparathyroidism
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: B i.e. Multiple Myeloma Old age, male sex & veebral involvement (lytic lesion) indicate towards diagnosis of Metastasis & Multiple myeloma. But Absence of primary and characterestic multiple punched out lesions on X-Ray skull is diagnostic of Multiple myelomaQ. Osteomalacia: - Looser's zoned or PseudofractureQ (Hallmark) Mnemonic - "Losse Pencilin Fish" - Pencilling-in- of veebral bodies - Cod - fish (marked biconvex) veebraeQ Hyper parathyroidism : - Brown tumorQ Mnemonic - - Sub periosteal ErosionQ "Brown Erosed Salt Basket" - Salt & Pepper or Pepper - Pot skullQ - Basket work appearanceQ of coex Renal Osteodystrophy(d/t CRF): - It combines findings of ostemalacia, hyperparathyroidism and bone sclerosis - Osteomalacia lit Looser's zone - Hyper PTH 1/t Subperiosteal Erosion of bone - Osteosclerosis Vt Rugger Jersey spineQ (End plate sclerosis with alternating bands of radiolucency) In children with CRF, the combination of rickets & hyperparathyroidism leads to Rotting Fence Post appearance.Q Multiple Myeloma: Two cardinal features are: Generalized reduction of bone density (Osteopenia) Localized areas of radiolucency (Punched outQ/Rain drop lesionsQ) in red marrow areas i.e. axial skeletal - spine & skull. In multiple Myeloma lytic lesions of spine are usually associated with some collapse & soft tissue extension i.e. paraveebral soft tissue shadows (differentiation from Metastasis). Differentiation from inflamatory lesions can be made as the interveebral disc space & aicular surfaces are not affected.

Question: What is the S.I. unit of effective dose?
A. Becquerel
B. Sievert
C. Gray
D. Roentgen
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: The effective dose (E) is used to estimate the risk in humans. It is hard to compare the risk from a dental exposure with, for example, the risk from a radiographic chest examination because different tissues with different radiosensitivities are exposed. 
The unit of effective dose is the Sv.

Question: Molten wax appearance is seen in
A. Achondroplasia
B. Pseudogout
C. Melorheostosis
D. Osteopetrosis
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Motten wax or Flowing candle wax appearance feature of Melorheostosis.

Question: Linear accelerator produces?
A. X rays
B. Beta rays
C. Gamma rays
D. Neutrons
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: ANSWER: (A) X raysREF: Oxford oncology 2nd edition page 398, O P Tondon's Inorganic chemistryRepeat from December 2009Linear accelerator and Betatron are used to produce X Rays by accelerating electronsCyclotron is used to produce Gamma rays.

Question: The best investigation to diagnose a case of acoustic neuroma is –
A. Gadolinium enhanced MRI
B. CT scan
C. Audiometric analysis
D. PET scan
Correct Answer: A

Question: Imaging tool of choice for GD?
A. DWI MRI with ADC maps
B. HMPAO SPECT
C. MR Spectroscopy
D. PET
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans ACreutzfeldt-Jacob disease is a spongiform encephalopathy caused by prions. On MRI T2 hyperintensity in basal ganglia, thalamus (Hockey stick sign), cortex and white matter with persistent diffusion restriction in considered most sensitive sign. On PET scan there can be hypometabolsim in affected area however it is less sensitive

Question: A young man with tuberculosis presents with massive recurrent hemoptysis. Most probable cause would be.
A. Pulmonary aery
B. Bronchial aery
C. Pulomary vein
D. Superior vena cava
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: B i.e. Broncheal aery In great majority of patients hemoptysis originates from systemic rather than pulmonary aeries and the bronchial vessels are almost universally involved. (Grainger) Massive hemoptysis in a patient of T.B. is usually d/ t erosion of bronchial aery which bleeds at systemic pressure.

Question: Absolute contraindication for MRI:
A. Pacemaker
B. Claustrophobia
C. Penile prosthesis
D. Joint replacement
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. (a) PacemakerRef: Harrison 19th ed. /440e-tContraindications of MRIAbsolute contraindicationRelative contraindication* Pacemaker* Metallic foreign body in the eye* Deep brain stimulator* Swan-Ganz catheter* Bullets or gunshot pellets* Cerebral aneurysm clips* Cochlear implant* Magnetic dental implants* AAA stent* stapes implant* Implanted drug infusion device* Neuro or bone growth stimulator* Surgical clips, wire sutures, screws or mesh* Ocular prosthesis* Penile prosthesis* Joint replacement or prosthesis* Other implants, in particular mechanical devices

Question: False about Varicocele is?
A. Dilated pampiniform plexus veins
B. More common on right side
C. Doppler USG is best investigation
D. Abnormality increases on Valsalva
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans BVaricocele - The left testicle is affected much more commonly ([?]85%) than the right. This may be due to the shorter course of the right testicular vein and its oblique insertion into the IVC which creates less backpressure. Isolated right varicoceles are rare and should prompt evaluation for a secondary varicocele.

Question: Minimum fluid collection required for radiological detection of pleural effusion in lateral decubitus view is: September 2009
A. 15 ml
B. 25 ml
C. 35 ml
D. 45 ml
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. Amount of pleural fluid required to cause a blunted costophrenic angle discernible on chest radiography is more than 300 ml. A chest computerized tomography scan is more sensitive than a simple chest x-ray and is often used for assessment of loculated effusions because, in some instances, up to 500 cc of loculated fluid can be obscured behind the dome of the diaphragm

Question: Bilateral rib notching is seen in –
A. Coarctation of aorta
B. PDA
C. TAPVC
D. All of the above
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Radiological features of COA

Reverse figure of '3' sign or double bulge sign or E sign on the left border of aortic shadow is formed by (above downward:- Prestenotic dilatation; coarctation itself (indentation); poststenotic dilatation.
Double aortic knuckle.
Dock's sign:- There is bilateral notching of inferior margins of 3-8 ribs. Rib notching is absent in the 1st & 2nd ribs because first and second intercostal arteries do not take part in the collateral circulation. Rib notching increases with age and after the age of 7 years, rib notching is present in almost all the cases.

Question: Soft markers on ultrasonography are helpful in diagnosing?
A. Fetal age
B. Chromosomal anomalies
C. Fetal size
D. Site of pregnancy
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. is'b'i.e., Chromosomal anomaliesAntenatal soft ultrasound markers are fetal sonographic findings that are generally not abnormalities as such but are indicative of an increased age adjusted risk of an underlying fetal aneuploidic or some non chromosomal abnormalities.

Question: Oblitration of left cardiac shadow on PA view is due to:
A. Lingular lesion
B. Left hilar lymphadenopathy
C. Left lower lobe lesion
D. Left upper apical lobe lesion
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: A i.e. Lingular lesion

Question: Expansible pulsating secondary metastasis is a feature of
A. Basal cell carcinoma
B. Renal cell carcinoma
C. Osteogenic sarcoma
D. Carcinoma prostate
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: B i.e. Renal Cell carcinoma

Question: Radiological hallmark of primary tuberculosis in childhood is-
A. Ghon's focus
B. Normal chest Xray
C. Lymphadenopathy
D. Pleural effusion
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. is 'c' i.e., Lymph adenopathy Primary tuberculosis in childhoodo Primary' tuberculosis in childhood can present in 4 major ways in addition to the normal chest radiography. These are:LymphadenopathyLobar or segmental parenchymal diseasePleural effusionMilitary involvemento Lymphadenopathy with or without parenchymal abnormality' is the radiological hallmark of primary tuberculosis in childhood.

Question: Pneumatosis Intestinalis is associated with?
A. Necrotising Enterocolitis
B. Gall Stone ileus
C. Diveiculosis
D. Hirschsprung Disease
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Pneumatosis Intestinalis is the presence of intramural air seen in Stage IIb of Necrotising Enterocolitis / Intestinal ischemia.

Question: Mount Fuji sign is a feature of
A. Fahr's disease
B. Acute bleed
C. Chronic bleed
D. Tension pneumocephalous
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Mount Fuji sign refers to the presence of gas (pneumocephalus) between the tips of the frontal lobes with a heaped-up appearance giving the appearance of Mount Fuji or M like appearance.

Question: Bone with a bone appearance is seen in
A. Osteogenesis imperfecta
B. Osteopetrosis
C. Scurvy
D. Rickets
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Bone within bone appearance is seen in : Osteopetrosis Acromegaly Bisphophonate therapy sickle cell anemia Healed phase of rickets and scurvy. Normal neonate.

Question: In pancreatic scanning radio-isotope used is
A. Se75
B. Cr51
C. I131
D. Tc99
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: se75 is used for pancreatic scanning Cr51 is used to label red blood cells for measurement of mass or volume I131 is used for treating hypehyroidism and thyroid cancer I123 and Tc99 are used for thyroid scanning

Question: This x-ray is suggestive of
A. Tetralogy of fallot
B. TAPVC
C. Tricuspid atresia
D. Ebstein's anomaly
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Boot shaped heart - Tetralogy of fallot.

Question: Red Color on color doppler suggests?
A. Aerial Blood
B. Venous Blood
C. Flow towards the transducer
D. Flow Away from the transducer
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Color Doppler Imaging: Doppler imaging illustrates only the direction of flow, color coded mean velocities and the range of the mean velocities. Blood flowing towards the ultrasound transducer is conventionally depicted in a band of colors ranging from deep red (low velocity) to bright yellow (high velocity). Flow in direction away from the transducer is indicated by band of colors ranging progressively from deep blue (low velocity) to cyan (high velocity).

Question: Geographic lytic lesions in the vault of the skull with bevelled edges are seen with:
A. Eosinophilic granuloma
B. Multiple myeloma
C. Hyperparathyroidism
D. Reticular cell carcinoma
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. Eosinophilic granuloma

Question: Echoencephalography is most useful in detecting:
A. Ventricular dilatation
B. Midline shift
C. Epilepsy
D. Vascular lesions
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. Ventricular dilatation

Question: Which one is non-ionising radiation -
A. MRI
B. CT Scan
C. X-ray
D. Position emission scintigraphy
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans- A. MRI.

Question: Radiological sign of ischemic colitis is
A. Popcorn appearance
B. Thumb print apperance
C. Cobrahead app
D. Inveed 3 sign
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: B i.e. Thumb printing

Question: Pelkan spur is seen in -
A. Rickets
B. Scurvy
C. Hemophilia
D. All
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Radiological features of scurvy: Palkan spur : metaphyseal spurs projecting at right angles to the shaft. White line of Frankel : calcified cailage in the metaphysis Trumefeld zone : zone of rarefraction below the white line of Frankel Wimburger sign : ring surrounding the ephiphyseal centres of ossification Pencil thin coex Subperiosteal hemorrhages Generalised osteoporosis

Question: Inventor of orthopantomographic machine is:
A. Hounsfield
B. Roentgen
C. Kell
D. Numata
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Paatero and, independently, Numata were the first to describe the principles of panoramic radiography. Figure given shows a schematic view of the relationships between the X-ray source, the patient, the secondary collimator and the image receptor during panoramic image formation.

Question: Radiosensitisers are all Except
A. Metronidazole
B. Nimorazole
C. Cisplatin
D. Amifostine
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Radiosensitisers are agents that increase the lethal effects of radiation when given during (or sholy prior) to its delivery. There are three clinically used radiosensitisers - hypoxic cell sensitisers, hypoxic cell cytotoxics and the halogenated pyrimidines - that increase the sensitivity of tumour cells with minimal effect on normal tissues. chemotherapy drugs like cisplatin, 5FU are radiosensitisers.Reference: Eric J Hall Textbook of Radiobiology for Radiologist; 5th edition

Question: The following are direct signs of Lung collapse seen on the Chest X-ray except:
A. Mediastinal shift
B. Displacement of the fissure
C. Crowding of the vessels
D. Loss of aeration
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. A. Mediastinal shift. (Ref. Sutton radiology 7th ed. 161)Direct signs of lung collapse includeIndirect signs are:i) opacity of the affected lobe(s)ii) crowding of the vessels and bronchi within the collapsed area:iii) displacement or bowing of the fissures.i) compensatory hyperinflation of the normal lung or lobes resulting in an increase in transradiancy with separation of the vascular marking;ii) displacement of the mediastinal structures toward the affected side.iii) displacement of the ipsilateral hilum which changes shape.Special signs of Lung Collapse:1.Rounded atelectasis"Comet tail" sign (vascular shadows seen radiating from opacity). Known in Asbestosis.2.Golden's 'S' signRight hilar/central mass with upper lobe collapse seen as convexity at the medial aspect of pulled up major fissure.3.Broncholobar signLower lobe bronchus is displayed within the opacity of the collapsed left lower lobe.4.Luftsiche! signGerman words luft = air, sichel = sickle, literally describes an 'air crescent' which may be seen between the aortic arch and the medial border of the collapse .The hyperextended superior segment of the ipsilateral lower lobe accounts for the paramediastinal lucency outlining the medial surface of the collapsed right or left upper lobe.

Question: Apgar scores were 3, and 6 at 1 and 5 minutes. At 10 Apgar scores were 3, and 6 at 1 and 5 minutes. At 10 minutes child shows features of breathlessness,on CXR-mediastinal shift was there, possible causes – 
a) Bilateral choanal atresiab) Pneumothoraxc) Congenital diaphragmatic herniad) Hyaline membrane disease
A. a
B. bc
C. ac
D. ad
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Congenital diaphragmatic hernia and pneumothorax cause respiratory distress with mediastinal shift to contralateral side.
Bilateral choanal atresia and HMD cause respiratory distress, but no mediastinal shift.

Question: 'Scalloping' of the edge of sigmoid colon on barium enema seen in:
A. Diveiculosis
B. Ulcerative colitis
C. Carcinoma colon
D. Pneumatosis intestinalis
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ans. Pneumatosis intestinalis

