Question: IgA deposits on skin biopsy
A. Henoch Schouleiln puspura
B. Giant cell aeritis
C. Microscopic polyangitis
D. Wegener's granulomatosis
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: A.i.e. Henosch Schonlein purpura

Question: A 7 years old boy presented with painful boggy swelling of scalp, multiple sinuses with purulent discharge, easily pluckable hairs and lymph nodes enlarged in occipital region. Which one of the following would be most helpful for diagnostic evaluation?
A. Bacterial culture
B. Biopsy
C. KOH mount
D. Patch test
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. c. KOH mount

Question: Gottron papules is seen in ?
A. Dermatomyositis
B. Scleroderma
C. Sarcoidosis
D. Behcets syndrome
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. is 'a' i.e., Dermatomyositis

Question: Which of the following drug is used in scabies as single oral dose agent: March 2011
A. Permethrin
B. Retinoids
C. Ivermectin
D. Co-trimoxazole
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. C: Ivermectin Ivermectin is used as single oral dose of 200 microgram/ kg body weight It can be repeated after 2 weeks It is indicated in epidemics of scabies in orphanages and Norwegian scabies Scabies: Incubation period: 4 weeks Pathognomic lesion: Burrow, which lies in stratum corneum MC site in infants: Scalp, face Most severe form: Norwegian scabies Drug used orally: Ivermectin

Question: Cicatrial Alopecia is seen in:
A. Tenia Capitis
B. Psoriasis
C. DLE
D. Alopecia Aereta
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: C. i.e. DLE

Question: In sebaceous glands, accumulation of sebum leads to:
A. Milia
B. Acne
C. Epidermoid cyst
D. Miliaria
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. b. Acne4 steps in pathogenesis of Acne are:Sebum productionHyperkeratosis of pilosebaceous unitPropionibacterium acnes colonization of pilosebaceous unit Inflammation

Question: Causative agent of Favus is:
A. Tinea schoenleinii
B. Tinea rubrum
C. Malassezia furfur
D. Epidermophyton floccosum
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. A. Tinea schoenleiniiFavous usually affect scalp, but occurring occasionally on any part of the skin and even at times on mucous membrane, caused by Tinea schoenleinii.

Question: Groove sign is seen in-
A. Syphilis
B. Dermatomyositis
C. LGV
D. SLE
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. is 'c' i.e., LGV * 'Groove sign of Greenblatt' is pathognomonic of LGV (secondary stage) - when inguinal lymph nodes are enlarged, they are separated by Poupart's ligment, producing a groove.Lymphogranuloma venerum (lymphogranuloma inguinale)* LGV is caused by chlamydia trachomatis, serotypes LI, L2, L3. Serotype L2 is the most common cause. The clinical course of LGV consist of following three stages : -i) First stage (Primary LGV): - Self limited, Single, asymptomatic, painless, non bleeding genital ulcer.ii) Secondary stage: - Painful inguinal lymphadenopathy (Remember - Ulcer is painless but lymphadenopathy is tender & painful). Swollen lymph nodes coalesce to form bubos, i.e., matted lymph nodes. Buboes may rupture to form discharging sinus.# Groove's sign - Enlarge lymph nodes both above and below inguinal ligament.iii) Tertiary LGV (genitorectal syndrome): - Characterized by proctocolitis.Complications of LGV* Esthiomene - Enlargement, thickening and fibrosis of labia.* Elephantiasis of the genitals* Rectal stricture* Systemic - Arthritis, pneumonitis, Perihepatitis

Question: Which of the following statements about mycosis fungoides is not true?
A. It is the most common skin lymphoma
B. Pautriers micro abscesses are common
C. It has a indolent course and good prognosis
D. It presents with diffuse erythroderma.
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: C i.e. It has indolent course and good prognosis

Question: Commonest etiology of erythema multiforme is -
A. Viral
B. Bacterial
C. Food
D. Drugs
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: A. i.e. Viral

Question: Which of the following statements about Kaposi sarcoma is not true?
A. The most common site is scalp
B. Lesions are dark blue or purple mostly
C. They are usually multifocal
D. Lymph nodes may be involved
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. A. The most common site is scalpKaposi sarcoma is mostly seen in extremities: most commonly on feet and occasionally on hands, ears, and nose.* Lesions are usually dark blue or purple and they may blanchewhen tumid (swollen).* Locally aggressive lesions can ulcerate, fungate or leave pigmented scars.* Lesions are usually multifocal which eventually fuse to form plaques and tumors of several centimeters in size.* Lymph nodes, mucosae and viscera may be involved as the disease progresses, although this can occur without skin involvement.Characteristic purple-colored plaques on the alar and tip of the nose in an HIV-positive female patient.

Question: Haascheiben cells in epidermis are responsible for?
A. Touch
B. Temperature
C. Pressure
D. Proprioception
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. is 'a' i.e., Touch

Question: Which among the following organisms causes Buruli ulcer?
A. M. Marinum
B. M. Ulcerans
C. M. kansasii
D. M. Smegmatis
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. B. M. UlceransM. Ulcerans causes Buruli ulcer.* It starts as a nodule or papule which progresses further to form a shallow necrotic ulcer.* Children (5-15 years old) have the highest incidence of Buruli ulcers, with most lesions on the lower extremities.Image: Extensive Buruli ulcer

Question: Sex worker with discharging ulcer, gram negative diplococci & growth on modified Thayer main media. Diagnosis ?
A. N. gonococci
B. Syphilis
C. LGV
D. Chaneroid
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. is 'a' i.e., N. gonococci Information in this question are ? Gram negative diplococci. Growth on modified Thayer-main media. o Neisseria gonorrhoeae is a gram negative diplococci and Thayer-main medium is the selective medium for gonococci. Lab diagnosis of gonorrhea Urethral discharge is the most impoant specimen. Transpo media La It processing is to occur within 6 hrs ---> Stua medium or A mies medium. If processing is to occur > 6 hrs --> JEMBEC or Gono - Pak system (media with self - contained CO2 -generating system). Cluture media In acute cases --> Chocolate agar or Muller - Hinton agar. In chronic cases ---> Selective medium - Thayer main medium. Normally the diagnosis of gonorrhoea is made by isolating the organism in culture. It may not be possible to obtain gonococci in culture from some chronic cases or from patients with metastatic lesions such as ahritis. Serological test may be of value in such instances. In serological tests antibodies to gonococcal pili, LPS and outer membrane proteins are detected. o Various tests are ? Complement fixation text Precipitation Passive agglutination lmmunofluorescence Radioimmunoassay Enzyme - linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) However, no serological test has been found useful for routine diagnostic procedure.Immunobloting

Question: A patient presents with erythematous scaly lesions on extensor aspect of elbows and knee. The clinical diagnosis is got by :
A. Auspitz sign
B. KOH smear
C. Tzanck smear
D. Skin biopsy
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. is 'a' ie Auspitz signErythematous scaly lesions on extensor aspect of elbow and knee favours the diagnosis of Psoriasis.The clinical diagnosis of psoriasis can be made by demonstrating Auspitz sign.It is a characteristic finding of psoriasis in which removal of scale leads to pinpoint bleeding.Tzanck testis used in the clinical diagnosis of PemphigusNote that Tzanck smear is used in the diagnosis of herpes virus infection.KOH smearis used for diagnosing fungal infections such as ringworm infections

Question: Chandu 32 years male presents with abdominal pain and vomitting. He also complain of some psychiatric symptoms & visual hallucination. Most likely diagnosis is
A. Hypothyroidism
B. Hypehyroidism
C. Hysteria
D. Intermittent Porphyria
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: D i.e. Intermittent porphyria

Question: Granular deposit of IgA at dermoepidermal junction is seen in -
A. Pemphigus vulgaris
B. Bullous pemphigoid
C. Dermatitis herpatiformis
D. Pemphigus foliaceous
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. is 'c' i.e., Dermatitis herpatiformis Immunopathological appearance of vesicobullous disorderso Bullous pemphigoid-Linear band of IgG or C3 in epidermal basement membraneo Pemphigus vulgaris-Cell surface deposits of IgG on keratinocyteso Pemphigus foliaceous-Cell surface deposits of IgG on keratinocyteso Pemphigoid gestationis-Linear band of C3 in epidermal basement membrane zoneo Dermatitis herpeteformis-Granular deposits of IgA in dermal papillaeo Chronic bullous disease of childhood-IgA deposits along the dermoepidermal junctiono Linear IgA dermatosis of adults-Linear deposits of IgA at dermoepidermal junction

Question: Hanging cuain sign seen in?
A. Pityriasis rosea
B. Pityriasis Versicolor
C. Pityriasis rubra pilaris
D. Pityriasis lichenoides chronica
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Pityriasis rosea REF: Dermatology. 1995; 190(3): 252. PubMed PMID: 7599393, Clinical Pediatric Dermatology - By Thappa page 104 PITYRIASIS ROSEA The primary eruption, herald patch (Mother spot) is a single oval or round patch with a central wrinkled salmon colored area and a darker peripheral zone separated by a "collarette of scales" (when stretched across the long axis, the scales tends to fold across the line of stretch, the so called Hanging cuain sign).

Question: A 25 yr old lady develops brown macular lesions over the bridge of nose and cheeks following exposure to sunlight. What is the most probable diagnosis?
A. Chloasma
B. Photodermatitis
C. SLE
D. Acne rosacea
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: This lady is showing features of chloasma which is a brownish macular hyperpigmentation of the face mostly over the cheek, forehead, nose, upper lip and chin. In a small percentage of cases it is also seen on the malar or mandibular areas of the face and occasionally the dorsum of the forearms. It is exacerbated by sunlight. This is usually seen in women during pregnancy, in women taking OCPs and living in sunny regions. It is also associated with the ingestion of diphenylhydantoin. Ref: Suurmond D. (2009). Section 13. Pigmentary Disorders. In D. Suurmond (Ed), Fitzpatrick's Color Atlas & Synopsis of Clinical Dermatology, 6e.

Question: Hailey - hailey disease is:
A. Benign familial chronic pemphigus
B. Pemphigus acutus
C. Pemphigus
D. Lyell's syndrome
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: A. i.e. Benign Familial Chronic Pemphigus

Question: Intraepidermal lgG deposition is seen in
A. Pemphigus
B. Bullous pemphigoid
C. Herpes genitalis
D. SLE
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Pemphigus

Question: Langerhans cells in skin are :
A. Antigen presenting cells
B. Pigment producing cells
C. Keratin synthesisng cells
D. Sensory neurons
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: A i.e Antigen presenting cells

Question: Child presents with linear verrucous plaques on the trunk with vacuolisation of keratinocytes in S.Spinosum and S.Granulosum. Diagnosis is ?
A. Incontinenta pigmenti
B. Delayed hypersensitivity reaction
C. Verrucous epidermal nevus
D. Linear darriers disease
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Verrucuous epidermal nevus Linear verrucuous lesions, with characteristic histopathological feature of granular degeneration of the epidermis ours the diagnosis of verrucous epidermal nevus. Epidermal nevus Epidermal nevi are hamaomas that are characterized by hyperplasia of the epidermis and adnexal structures. These nevi may be classified into a number of distinct variants which are based on clinical morphology, extent of involvement and the predominant epidermal structure in the lesion. Variants of the epidermal nevi are ? - Verrucuous epidermal nevus - Nevus sebaceous - Nevus comedonicus - Eccrine nevus - Apocrine nevus - Becker's nevus - White sponge nevus Verrucuous epidermal nevus Verrucuous epidermal ,nevus consists of hyperplasia of the surface epidermis and typically appears as verrucuous papules that coalasce to form well demarcated, skin colored to brown, papillomatous plaque. Most lesions are present at bih and develop during infancy. They enlarge slowly during childhood and generally reach a stable size at adolescence. Lesions may be localized or diffuse. Linear configurations are common especially on the limbs and may follow skin tension lines or Blaschko's lines. The salient histological features are ? Perinuclear vacuolization of the cells in the stratum spinosum and stratum granulosum. Irregular cellular boundaries peripheral to the vacuolization and increased number of irregularly :,aped large keratohyaline granules. Compact hyperkeratosis in stratum corneum. Darner white disease Autosomal dominant disease. Males and females are equally affected. Daffier white disease is not present at bih and usually begins in the first or second decade. Characteristic sites of prediliction are the face, forehead, scalp, chest and the hack (seborrhic sites). Clinical features consists of way papules and plaques in (seborrhic sites). Histology shows suprabasal acantholysis in epidermis with dyskeratotic cells. Incontinentia pigmentii X linked disease (so only seen in females) Lesions are present along the Blaschko lines, which are initially vesicular, that later on turns into verrucuous lesions and hyperpigmented stages. Common histological features are : - Hverkeratosis - Eosinophilic spongiosis of epidermis - Basal cell degeneration - Pigment incontinenti

Question: Scalp and face are involved in ?
A. Adult scabies
B. Nodular scabies
C. Infantile scabies
D. None
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. is 'c' i.e., Infantile scabies Type Feature o Infantile scabies Scalp, face, palms and soles are involved o Norwegian scabies Crusted hyperkeratotic lesions on face , palms, soles, nails. Itching is not prominent. Mites are found in thousand, most severe form of scabies Crusted scabies Extensive crusts Nodular scabies Extensive crusts Genital scabies Extensive crusts Animal scabies History of contact with cat or dog. Atypical presentation

Question: Lymphadenopathy is seen is A/E
A. Syphlis 1st Stage
B. Donovanosis
C. LGV
D. Chancroid
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: B i.e. Donovanosis

Question: Androgenic alopecia in female is caused by:
A. Myxedema
B. Cushing disease
C. Stein-Leventhal syndrome
D. Addison's disease
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. C. Stein-Leventhal syndromeAndrogenetic Alopecia (Male pattern; Female pattern): AssociationsIn women, features of hyperandrogenism may be present inthe form of hirsutism, acne & clitoromegaly.Always rule out polycystic ovary disease (PCOD).Stein-Leventhal syndrome, also called polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)Myxedema:Hair texture may become fine, and a diffuse alopecia occurs in up to 40% of patients, persisting for months after restoration of euthyroidism.

Question: What is the percentage of patients with disseminated discoid lupus erythematosus who develop SLE?
A. 2%
B. 22%
C. 52%
D. 82%
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: The risk is higher in patients with disseminated DLE (22%) than in DLE confined to the head and neck (1.2%). Females developing DLE before the age of 40 years,with HLA-B8 in their histocompatibility type, have an increasedrisk of 'conveing' to SLE. Neither immunological nor biochemical abnormalities appear to alter the patient's progress. Note: Carpet tack/tin tack sign is positive in DLE lesions. Ref: Rook's textbook of dermatology, Edition-8, Page 51.20.

Question: Which of following is/are not the feature of Henoch?Schonlein Purpura (HSP)
A. Abdominal pain
B. Splinter haemorrhage
C. Thrombocytopenia
D. Epistaxis
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: C. i.e. Thrombocytopenia

Question: A boy comes from Bihar with non-anesthetic hypopigmented atropic patch over face, diagonosis is
A. P. alba
B. P. versicolour
C. Indeterminate leprosy
D. Borderline leprosy
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: C i.e. Indeterminate leprosy Points in our of diagnosing indeterminate leprosy: - Epidermal atrophyQ Non scaly & AnesthesiaQ (if present) Resident of high leprosy prevelence state? (Bihar)

Question: A young man presents with asymptomatic macules and erythematous painless lesion over glans with generalised lymphadenopathy. Treatment of choice in this condition:
A. Ceftriaxone
B. Benzathine penicillin
C. Acyclovir
D. Fluconazole
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. b. Benzathine penicillin

Question: Alopecia universalis is?
A. Loss of all the scalp hair
B. Loss of all body hair
C. Loss hair at the scalp margin
D. Male pattern hair loss
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. is 'b' i.e., Loss of all body hair * In alopecia aerata, when there is total loss of scalp hair it is called Alopecia totalis. When there is loss of total body hair it is referred as Alopecia universalis. Alopecia along the scalp margin is called ophiasis. An inverse ophiasis pattern (sisaphio) is when it spares occipital region and affects rest of the scalpPresentation of alopecia areata* Young adults are affected, but can occur at any age. Round or oval circumscribed patches of hair loss, which may be single or multiple. Alopecia is sharply defined. Scalp is the first affected site in most cases but any hair bearing skin, e.g. beard, eyebrows and eyelashes can be involved. Exclamation mark hair - These are diagnostic and are characterized by broken-off stubby hair (distal end is broader than proximal end). Exclamation mark hair are seen at the margins of hair loss area.* The characteristic feature is sparing of gray/white hair and preferentially affecting pigmented (black/brown) hair. This results in a dramatic change in hair colour if alopecia progress rapidly and referred to as "going white overnight phenomenon".* In 10-15% of patient's there is nail involvement - Fine stippled pitting ("hammered brass"), mottled lunula, trachynonychia (rough nails), onychomadesis (separation of nail from matrix).

Question: A 6-year-old child presents with lesions on face, covered with honey colored crusts. Pruritus is present. The possible cause can be:
A. Impetigo
B. Herpes
C. Chickenpox
D. Molluscum contagiosum
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. a. ImpetigoNon bullous impetigo or impetigo contagiosa lesions have golden yellow, honey coloured crusting

Question: A patient consults a dermatologist about a skin lesion on her neck. Examination reveals a 1-cm diameter,red, scaly plaque with a rough texture and irregular margins. Biopsy demonstrates epidermal and dermal cells with large, pleomorphic, hyperchromatic nuclei. Which of the following conditions would most likely predispose this patient to the development of this lesion?
A. Actinic keratosis
B. Compound nevus
C. Dermal nevus
D. Junctional nevus
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: The lesion is a squamous cell carcinoma of the skin. Actinic keratosis, which is a hyperplastic lesion of sun-damaged skin, predisposes for squamous cell carcinoma. Another predisposing condition to remember is xeroderma pigmentosum, which predisposes for both squamous cell and basal cell carcinomas of skin. A nevus is a mole, containing characteristic cells called nevocellular cells. If the nevocellular cells are located at the dermal-epidermal junction (junctional nevus), in the dermis (dermal nevus), or both (compound nevus) they do not predispose for squamous cell carcinomas of the skin. Ref: Vujevich J.J., Goldberg L.H. (2012). Chapter 246. Cryosurgery and Electrosurgery. In L.A. Goldsmith, S.I. Katz, B.A. Gilchrest, A.S. Paller, D.J. Leffell, N.A. Dallas (Eds), Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in General Medicine, 8e.

Question: Tzank smear helps in the diagnosis of :
A. Herpes viral infection
B. Bullous pemphigoids
C. Carcinoma of cervix
D. None
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: A. i.e. Herpes

Question: Row of tombstone is seen in which skin disorder:
A. Pemphigus vulgaris
B. Pemphigus foliaceous
C. Paraneoplastic pemphigus
D. Bullous pemphigoid
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. A. Pemphigus vulgaris* Pemphigus vulgaris is characterized by following signs:1. Bulla spread sign2. Perilesional, and distant Nikolsky sign3. Tzanck smear: Acantholytic cell* Histopathology shows suprabasal blister with row of tomb stone appearance of basal cells.* Direct immunofluorescence from perilesional skin demonstrated intra epidermal IgG deposits' in a fishnet pattern.

Question: Vitamin D analogue calcitriol is useful in the treatment of ?
A. Lichen planus
B. Psoriasis
C. Phemphigus
D. Leprosy
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. is 'b' i.e., Psoriasis

Question: Apple jelly nodules on the nasal septum are found in cases of ?
A. Tuberculosis
B. Syphilis
C. Lupus Vulgaris
D. Rhinoscleroma
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. is 'c' i.e., Lupus vulgaris Lupus vulgaris It is an indolent and chronic form of tuberculous infection. Female to male ratio is 2:1. Most common site is the mucocutaneous junction of the nasal septum, the nasal, vestibule and the ala. Characteristic Feature is the presence of apple- jelly nodules (Brown gelatinous nodules) in skin. Lupus can cause perforation of cailaginous pa of nasal septum. Confirmation is by Biopsy

Question: A 50 years old patient presented to the skin OPD with erythematous scaly plaques over trunk and extremities for last l0 years. Lesions are occasionally itchy. There is history of remission and relapse with exacerbation during winters. Most likely diagnosis is?
A. Lichen planus
B. Psoriasis vulgaris
C. Pityriasis rosea
D. Seborrhic dermatitis
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans: B. Psoriasis vulgaris(Ref: Neena Khanna 4'h/e p. 40-48; Roxburg lVh/e p. 128-42; Venkataram 1"'/e p. 491)Psoriasis (psoriasis vulgaris):Psoriasis is chronic dermatosis characterized by unpredictable course of remission and relapse and presence of well defined silvery white scaly papules and plaques on erythematous base.Aggravated in winter.Lesions are mildly pruritic or non-pruritic.

Question: 'Cayenne pepper' stippling due to hemosiderin is found in :
A. Erythroplasia of Queyrat
B. Pagets disease
C. Plasma cell balantitis of zoon
D. Metronidazole
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: C i.e. Plasma cell balantitis of zoon

Question: A child scratches his hand with a pen. A red wheel appears which persists for 30 minutes. What would be the diagnosis?
A. Contact urticaria
B. Dermographism
C. Pressure urticaria
D. Atopy
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. b. DermographismWhite dermographism is seen in atopic dermatitisDermographism is seen in urticaria

Question: Comedons are characteristics of:
A. Acne vulgaris
B. Acne rosasea
C. SLE
D. d. Adenoma sebaceum
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans is 'a' i.e, Acne vulgaris

Question: Inheritence of ichthyosis vulgaris is :
A. X linked dominant
B. X linked recessive
C. Autosomal dominant
D. Autosomal recessive
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: C i.e. Autosomal dominant

Question: A 40 yr old male has a rash over groin with demarcated peripheral scaling and central clearing. It could be due to: September 2005
A. Candidiasis
B. Malassezia furfur
C. Trichophyton
D. Aspergillosis
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. C: Trichophyton Tinea cruris, a pruritic superficial fungal infection of the groin and adjacent skin, is the second most common clinical presentation for dermatophytosis The most common etiologic agents for tinea cruris include Trichophyton rubrum and Epidermophyton floccosum; less commonly Trichophyton mentagrophytes and Trichophyton verrucosum are involved. Tinea cruris is a contagious infection transmitted by fomites, such as contaminated towels or hotel bedroom sheets, or by autoinoculation from a reservoir on the hands or feet (tinea manuum, tinea pedis, tinea unguium). The etiologic agents in tinea cruris produce keratinases, which allow invasion of the cornified cell layer of the epidermis. Findings includes: Large patches of erythema with central clearing are centered on the inguinal creases and extend distally down the medial aspects of the thighs and proximally to the lower abdomen and pubic area. Scale is demarcated sharply at the periphery. In acute tinea cruris infections, the rash may be moist and exudative. Chronic infections typically are dry with a papular annular or arciform border and barely perceptible scale at the margin. Central areas typically are hyperpigmented and contain a scattering of erythematous papules and a little scale. Malassezia furfur is implicated in pityriasis versicolor and malassezia folliculitis.

Question: True about Acrodermatitis enteropathica is?
A. Lifelong treatment required
B. Autosomal dominant disorder
C. Wound healing is not affected
D. Zinc absorption is normal
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: ANSWER: (A) Lifelong treatment requiredREF: Rook's 8rh ed p. 59.73Acrodermatitis enteropathica:Rare autosomal recessive diseaseZinc absorption is lowDisease starts at weaning when child is not given milkPhotophobia is seen, vescicobullous lesions may be seenGrowth is retarded and wound healing is poorZinc sulfate is used for treatment , prolonged therapy up to adult age is necessary, continuous supplementation of zinc is necessaryA single dose of zinc cures all clinical manifestations

Question: A young 8 years old boy with multiple, small, pin point, shiny, papular lesions on dorsal aspect of hand, forearms and his penis also. Diagnosis is:
A. Molluscum cantagiosum
B. Scabies
C. Lichen planus
D. Lichen nitidus
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ans. d Lichen nitidus (Ref: Mark Lebwohl 2nd/345)A young 8 years old boy with multiple, small, pin point, shiny, papular lesions on dorsal aspect of hand, forearms and his penis also. Diagnosis is Lichen nitidus.Grouped pinhead lesions on elbow. abdomen, penis and dorsum of hand in a child as shown in the picture is highly suggestive of lichen nitidus.Lie hen scrofulosorum is an uncommon asymptomatic lichenoid eruption of minute papule occurring in children and adolescents with strongly positive tuberculin reaction. It mainly involves perifollicular distribution on abdomen, chest, back and proximal limbs. A hallmark is that superficial epitheloid dermal granuloma surround hair follicles and sweat ducts and may occupy several dermal papillae. Lichen NitidusLesion and etiology are similar, but size is smaller 1.2 mm (pinhead sizeQ)Occurs as grouped lesions on elbow, abdomen, penis and dorsum of handQMucosal or nail changes are rareSelf limiting, non-itchyQHistopathology:Dense, circumscribed and distinctive infiltrate of histio-lymphocytic cells situated directly beneath thinned epidermis results in widening of papillary dermis with elongation and the appearance of embracement by neighboring rete ridges ( Ball in clutch appearanceQ).Thinned epidermis demonstrates central parakeratosisQ, variable /focal hyper keratosis without hypergranulosis, minimal hydropic degeneration and few dyskeratotic cellsTreatment:Antihistaminics particularly AstemazoleQ is effective. Lichen ScrofulosorumLichen scrofulosorum is a lichenoid eruption of minute papulesQOccurs in children and adolescents with tuberculosis.Pathogenesis:Usually associated with chronic tuberculous disease of the LNs and honesQClinical Features:Eruption is asymptomatic and is usually confined to the trunkQ.Lesions consist of symptomless, small, firm, follicular or parafollicular papules of a yellowish or pink color with flat-top or bear a minute homy spine or fine scales on their surfaceQ.It mainly involves perifollicular distribution on abdomen, chest, back and proximal limbsQ.Histopathology:A hallmark is that superficial epitheloid dermal granuloma surround hair follicles and sweat ducts and may occupy several dermal papillaeQ.Treatment:Antituberculous therapy results in complete resolution within a matter of weeksQ.FeatureLichen NitidusLichen planusSymptomsAsymptomaticItchy (marked)Cutaneous lesionMultiple, discrete (or closely grouped), minute, pinpoint to pinhead sizedQ (1- 2mm), flat/ round or dome shaped papule with a glistening (shiny surface)Q.Papules are flesh colored or pink or shiny hypopigmentedQ (in blacks)Larger, plain (flat) topped, polygonal, pruritic, pink/purple (violaceous) papuleQWickham's striaeAbsentPresentQGroupingPresentQUsually notMucous membrane involvementUncommonCommonQ (Variably present)SiteMost frequently on flexural surfaces of upper extremities i.e. arm. forearm, wrist and dorsal surface of hands, lower abdomen, breast, the glans and shaft of penis and other areas of genital regionQFlexures (wrist), extremities (shin), lower back and genitalsQ

Question: A man came to the casualty with some skin lesions after exposure to the sun. He is allergic to sunlight. Solar uicaria is characterized by:
A. Stinging
B. Erythema
C. Wheal formation
D. Loss of sensation
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Uncommon sunlight-induced whealing confined to exposed body sites. Eruption occurs within minutes of exposure and resolves in a few hours. Very disabling and sometimes life threatening. Action spectrum is UVB, UVA, and visible light or any combination thereof. Most commonly UVA. Is an immediate type I hypersensitivity response to cutaneous and/or circulating photo allergens. Therapy: multiple phototherapy sessions in low but increasing doses on the same day ("rush hardening"); oral immunosuppressive agents or plasmapheresis. Prevention: sun avoidance, sunscreens with high protection factors against action spectrum. Ref: Suurmond D. (2009). Section 10. Photosensitivity, Photo-Induced Disorders, and Disorders by Ionizing Radiation. In D. Suurmond (Ed),Fitzpatrick's Color Atlas & Synopsis of Clinical Dermatology,6e.

Question: All of the following is given for the treatment for Pityriasis versicoler Except:
A. Ketoconazole
B. Griseofulvin
C. Clotrimazole
D. Selenium sulphate
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: B i.e. Griseofulvin

Question: Decreased number of melanocytes are seen in: March 2005
A. Pebaldism
B. Albinism
C. Vitiligo
D. All of the above
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ans. D: All of the above Melanopenic hypopigmentation is due to decrease in number of melanosomes, which could be due to: Genetic diseases-albinism, piebaldism A utoimmune diseases-vitiligo Post-inflammatory-Discoid lupus erythematosus Piebaldism is due to an absence of melanocytes in affected skin and hair follicles. The condition is present at bih and usually remains unchanged throughout life. This is caused by mutations of the KIT proto-oncogene. 14 point mutations, 9 deletions, 2 nucleotide splice mutations, and 3 inseions of the KIT gene are believed to be mutations causing piebaldism. The severity of the condition correlates with the site of the mutation within the KIT gene. Piebaldism is an autosomal dominant genetic disorder meaning half of an affected person's children will also have the condition. Piebaldism is one of the cutaneous signs of Waardenburg syndrome. Piebaldism is a rare inherited condition characterised by: White forelock in 80-90% of those affected (poliosis) White patch (due to absence of pigmentation) of the central poion of the forehead Eyebrow and eyelash hair may also be affected, either continuously or discontinuously with the forelock White patches of skin may also be seen on the face (paicularly the chin), trunk and extremities (hands and feet are not usually affected) Often a narrow border of hyperpigmented skin surrounds the white unpigmented patches Sometimes islands of normal or hyperpigmented skin occur within the white patches. Albinism is a condition in which people have little or no melanin pigment (compound that creates colour) in their eyes, skin or hair. Because of this people with albinism look a little different from other members of their family without albinism. They have very fair skin which is prone to sunburn, their hair is white or a very light colour, and they may squint a lot as their eyes are sensitive to sunlight.

Question: Cutaneous sign of diabetes mellitus are all except
A. Necrobiosis lipoidica
B. Carotinosis
C. Shin spots (granuloma annulare)
D. Angiokeratomas
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ans: d (Angiokeratomas)Ref: IADVL, 3rd ed. vol. 2 pg. 1369- 1371Angiokeratoma corporis diffusum is a manifestation of Fabry's disease. All others are dermatological manifestations of diabetes mellitus.Skin manifestations of diabetis mellitus: Diabetic dermopathy Pigmented pretibial papules Shin spots Necrobiosis lipoidicaClear cell syringoma Diabetic bullae Xanthoma rubeosis

Question: A 22 year old woman developed small itchy wheals after physical exeion, walking in the sun, eating hot spicy food and when she was angry. The most likely diagnosis is:
A. Chronic idiopathic utricaria
B. Heat uicaria
C. Solar uicaria
D. Cholinergic uicaria
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: D i.e. Cholinergic Uicaria

Question: Darrier's sign is seen in -
A. Darrier's disease
B. Urticaria pigmentosa
C. Allergic vasculitis
D. Atopic dermatitis
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. is 'b' i.e., Urticaria pigmentosao Urticaria pigmentosa is a familial cutaneous disorder characterised by generalised distribution of red brown macules,o Each lesion represents a collection of mast cells in the dermis with hyperpigmentation of overlying epidermis,o The most characteristic features is that these lesions urticate on scratching.o Light scratching with the point of forceps or rounded tip of a pen or even rubbing causes these mast cells to degranulate leading to localized urticaria (become red swollen and enlarged) - Darrier's Sign Extensive release of histamine from mast cell degranulation may result in - Headache, flushing diarrhea and pruritis.

Question: 12 years old male presented with intensely itchy grouped vesicles on buttock, trunk and scalp. On exposure to wheat they exaggerate. Diagnosis is -
A. Herpes simplex
B. Dermatitis herpetiformis
C. Pemphigus vulgaris
D. Bullous impetigo
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans is 'b' i.e. Dermatitis herpetiformis o Among given options only dermatitis herpetiformis is a gluten sensitivity disorder and aggravates on on eating gluten (wheat, rye, barley).Other features in favour of diagnosis areo Intense itching (characteristic feature)o Distribution of lesion - buttock, trunk and scalpo Age group - DH is commonly seen in 2nd to 3rd decade.o Has been explained in previous sessions.

Question: Bullous impetigo is caused by ?
A. Streptococcus
B. Staphylococcus
C. Staphylococcus
D. Y. Pestis
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. is 'b' i.e., Staphylococcus Impetigo Impetigo is a highly contagious, Gram-positive bacterial infection of superficial layer of epidermis. Impetigo occurs in Two forms : ? 1. Non - bullous impetigo (Impetigo contagiosa) It is the most common bacterial infection of children (occurs mainly in children in contrast to Bullous impetigo which occurs in infants). It is caused by both staphylococcus aureus and hemolytic group A streptococcus (Str. pyogens), though it is mostly caused by staph aureus. Most commonly occurs on face, i.e., around nose & mouth; and exposed pas, i.e., arms, legs. Presents erythematous macule/papule which changes into vesicle which soon ruptures with formation of crusting. Crust has characteristic features : - Honey-yellow colour in streptococcal impetigo. Waxy in staphylococcal impetigo. Lesion heal without scarring. Mucous membrane involvement is rare. Lymphadenopathy is common 2. Bullous impetigo It is caused by staphylococcus aureus most often phage type 71. It usually occurs in infants and manifests as vesicle that develop into bulla and later a pustule without any surrounding erythema. It mainly occurs on face. Mucous membrane may be involved (in contrast to impetigo contigiosa). Lymphadenopathy is rare.

Question: Mycosis cells are altered :
A. T Lymphocytes
B. Monocytes
C. b lymphocytes
D. Eosinophils
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: A. i.e. T lymphacytis

Question: HPV with low risk sexually transmitted types include
A. 6 & 11
B. 16 & 18
C. 26 & 53
D. 73 & 82
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: (A) 6 & 11# GENITAL INFECTIONS: Since cervical and female genital infection by specific HPV types is highly associated with cervical cancer, those types of HPV infection have received most of the attention from scientific studies.> HPV infections in that area are transmitted primarily via sexual activity.> Of the 120 known human papillomaviruses, 51 species and three subtypes infect the genital mucosa. 15 are classified as high-risk types (16, 18, 31,33, 35, 39, 45, 51, 52, 56, 58, 59, 68, 73, and 82) 3 as probable high-risk (26, 53, and 66) 12 as low-risk (6, 11,40, 42, 43, 44, 54, 61, 70, 72, 81, and CP6108).> If a college woman has at least one different partner per year for four years, the probability that she will leave college with an HPV infection is greater than 85%.> Condoms do not completely protect from the virus because the areas around the genitals including the inner thigh area are not covered, thus exposing these areas to the infected person's skin.

Question: Fox Fordyce's disease is a disease of ?
A. Eccrine sweat glands
B. Apocrine sweat glands
C. Sebaceous glands
D. Pilosebaceous glands
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. is 'b' i.e., Apocrine sweat glands See explanation- I of session- 9 of Skin of All India 2014-15 pattern of this book.

Question: What is the wavelength of UV rays used in Woods lamp?
A. 360 nM
B. 460 nM
C. 660 nM
D. 760 nM
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. A. 360nMA Wood's lamp generates 360-nm ultraviolet (or "black") light produced by a mercury vapor source passed through a nickel oxide filter that can be used to aid the evaluation of certain skin disorders.

Question: An athletic male with itchy lesion at groin as shown below, causative agent can be all EXCEPT:
A. Trichophyton
B. Microsporum
C. Epidermophyton
D. Aspergillus
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ans. d. AspergillusThe itchy lesion in picture is a typical dermatophyte infection, and its known Jock's itch or Tineacruris. It is also known as Dhobi's itch. Since it is a dermatophyte infection, it cannot be caused by Aspergillus.

Question: Not a fungal infection is:
A. Mycoses fungoides
B. Tinea nigra Palmaris
C. White Piedra
D. Black Piedra
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans: A (Mycoses fungoides) Ref: Rook's Dermatology, 8th ed.Explanation:Mycosis Fungoides/Sezary SyndromeMycosis fungoides and Sezary syndrome are different manifestations of a tumor of CD4+ helper T cellsClinically, the cutaneous lesions of mycosis fungoides typically progress through three somewhat distinct stages, an inflammatory premycotic phase, a plaque phase, and a tumor phaseHistologically, the epidermis and upper dermis are infiltrated by neoplastic T cells, which often have a cerebriform appearance due to marked infolding of the nuclear membrane.Sezary syndrome is a variant in which skin involvement is manifested as a generalized exfoliative erythroderma.In contrast to mycosis fungoides, the skin lesions rarely proceed to tumefaction, and there is an associated leukemia of "Sezary" cells with characteristic cerebriform nuclei.The tumor cells express the adhesion molecule CLA and the chemokine receptors CCR4 and CCR10Transformation to aggressive T-cell lymphoma occurs occasionally as a terminal event.FUNGAL INFECTIONSNatural defence against fungiFatty acid content of the skinpH of the skin, mucosal surfaces and body fluidsEpidermal turnoverNormal floraPredisposing factorsTropical climate, Manual labour populationLow socioeconomic status. Profuse sweatingFriction with clothes, synthetic innerwearMalnourishment, Immunosuppressed patientsHIV, Congenital Immunodeficiencies, patients on corticosteroids, immunosuppressive drugs. DiabetesFungal Infections: ClassificationSuperficial cutaneous:Surface infections eg. P.versicolor, Dermato- phytosis. Candidiasis, T.nigra, PiedraSubcutaneous:Mycetoma, Chromoblastomycosis, SporotrichosisSystemic (opportunistic infection)Histoplasmosis, CandidiasisOf these categories, Demiatophvtosis, P.versicolor, Candidiasis are common in daily practicePityriasis versicolorEtiologic agent: Malassezia furfurClinical Features:Multiple, discrete, discoloured, macules.Fawn, brown, grey or hypopigmentedPinhead sized to large sheets of discolourationSeborrheic areas, upper half of body: trunk, arms, neck, abdomen.Scratch sign positiveWood's Lamp examination: Yellow fluoro-scenceKOH preparation: Spaghetti and meatball appearanceCoarse mycelium, fragmented to short filaments 2-5 micron wide and up to 2-5 micron long, together with spherical, thick-walled yeasts 2-8 micron in diameter, arranged in grape like fashion.TreatmentTopical:Ketoconazole. Clotrimazole. Miconazole, Bifonazole, Oxiconazole, Butenafine.Terbinafine. Selenium sulfide. Sodium thiosulphateOral:Fluconamg 4(X)mg single doseKetoconazole 2(X)mg OD x I4daysGriseofulvin is NOT effective.Hypopigmentation will take weeks to fadeScaling will disappear soonPityrosporum folliculitisEtiology: Malassezia furfurAge group: Teenagers or young adult malesClinical features: Itchy papules and pustules, scattered on the shoulders and back.Treatment: Oral Itraconazole, Ketaconazole, Fluconazole or topical Ketoconazole shampoo.Tinea nigra palmarisEtiology: Exophiala werneckiiClinical features: Asymptomatic superficial infection of palms; deeply pigmented, brown or black macular, non-scaly patches, resembling a silver nitrate stain.Treatment: Topical Econazole. Ketoconazole. Benzoic acid compound, Thiabendazole 2% in 90% DMSO or 10% Thiabendazole suspension.Black piedraEtiology: Piedraia hortaeClinical features: Hard, dark, multiple superficial nodules: firmly adherent black, gritty, hard nodules on hairs of scalp, beard, moustache or pubic area, hair may fracture easily.Treatment:Shaving or cutting the hair.Terbinafine, Benzoic acid compound ointment, 1:2000 solution of mercury perchlorideWhite piedraEtiology: Trichosporon beigeliiClinical features:Soft, white, grey or brown superficial nodules on hairs of the beard, moustache, pubic areas. Hair shaft weakened and breaks.Treatment: Shaving or cutting the hair. Responses to topical antifungals, azoles and allvamines have been reported but are unpredictable.DermatophytosisMycology:Three genera:Microsporum, Trichophyton, EpidermophytonThrive on dead, keratinized tissue - within the stratum comeum of the epidermis, within and around the fully keratinized hair shaft, and in the nail plate and keratinized nail bed.Tinea capitisEndothrix and EctothrixMost common - trichophyton violaceumVarieties:Non inflammatoryGray patchBlack dotSeborrheic dermatitisInflammatoryFavusKerion. agminate folliculitisNon inflammatory Tinea capitis:Black dot/Grey patchBreakage of hair gives rise to 'black dots*Patchy alopecia, often circular, numerous broken-off hairs, dull greyWood's lamp examination: green fluorescence (occasional non-flu ore scent cases)Tinea capitis: Kerion, agminate folliculitisInflammatory varietyMicrosporum,Trichophyton verrucosum. Trichophyton mentagrophytesPainful, inflammatory boggy swelling with purulent discharge.Hairs may be matted, easily pluckableLymphadenopathyCo-infection with bacteria is commonMay heal with scarring alopeciaTinea capitis: FavusInflammatory varietyKashmirTrichophyton schonleiniiYellowish, cup-shaped crusts develop around a hair with the hair projecting centrally.Extensive patchy hair loss with cicatricial alopeciaTinea facieiErythematous scaly patches on the faceAnnular or circinate lesions and indurationItching, burning and exacerbation after sun exposureSeen often in immunocompromised adultsTinea barbaeRingworm of the beard and moustache areasInvasion of coarse hairsDisease of the adult maleHighly inflammatory, pustular folliculitisHairs of the beard or moustache are surrounded by inflammatory' papulopustules, usually with oozing or crusting, easily pluckablePersist several monthsTinea corporisLesions of the trunk and limbs, excluding ringworm of the specialized sites such as the scalp, feet and groins etc.The fungus enters the stratum corneum and spreads centrifugally. Central clearing results once the fungi are eliminated.A second wave of centrifugal spread from the original site may occur with the formation of concentric erythematous inflammatory rings.Classical lesion:Annular patch or plaque with erythematous papulovesicles and scaling at the periphery with central clearing resembling the effects of ring worm.Polycyclic appearance in advanced infection due to incomplete fusion of multiple lesionsSites: waist, under breasts, abdomen, thighs etc.Tinea crurisItchingErythematous plaques, curved with well demarcated margins extending from the groin down the thighs.Scaling is variable, and occasionally may mask the inflammatory changes.Vesiculation is rareTinea mannumTwo varieties:Non inflammatory: Dry, scaly, mildly itchyInflammatory: Vesicular, itchy Tinea pedisWearing of shoes and the resultant macerationAdult males commonest, children rarelyPeeling, maceration and fissuring affecting the lateral toe clefts, and sometimes spreading to involve the undersurface of the toes.Varieties:Interdigital typePapulosquammous ('moccasin foot')Vesiculo-bullousTinea UnguiumDirty, dull, dry, pitted, ridged, split, discoloured, thick, uneven, nails with subungual hyperkeratosis Different types described depending on the site of nail involvement and its depth.Distal and lateral onychomycosesProximal subungual onychomycosesWhite superficial onychomycosesTotal dystrophic onychomycosesTreatment: RingwormTopical: Bifonazole. Ketoconazole Oxiconazole, Clotrimazole, Miconazole, Butenafine, Terbinafine.Vehicle: Lotions, creams, powders, gels are available.CANDIDIASISCausative organism:Candida albicans, Candida tropicalis, Candida pseudotropicalisSites of affection:Mucous membraneSkinNailsCandidiasis : MucosalOral thrush:Creamy, curd-like, white pseudomembrane, on ery thematous baseSites:Immunocompetent patient: cheeks, gums or the palate.Immunocompromised patients: affection of tongue with extension to pharynx or oesophagus; ulcerative lesions may occur.Angular cheilitis (angular stomatitis / perleche): Soreness at the angles of the mouthVulvovaginitis (vulvovaginal thrush): Itching and soreness with a thick, creamy white dischargeBalanoposthitis:Tiny papules on the glans penis after intercourse, evolve as white pustules or vesicles and rupture.Radial fissures on glans penis in diabetics. Vulvovaginitis in conjugal partnerCandidiasis - FlexuralIntertrigo: (Flexural candidiasis)Erythema and maceration in the folds; axilla, groins and webspaces.Napkin rash:Pustules, with an irregular border and satellite lesionsCandidiasis: FlailChronic Paronychia:Swelling of the nail fold with pain and discharge of pus.Chronic, recurrent.Superadded bacteria! infectionOnychomycosis:Destruction of nail plate.Treatment of candidiasisTreat predisposing factors like poor hygiene, diabetes, AIDS, conjugal infectionTopical:Clotrimazole, Miconazole, Ketoconazole. Ciclopirox olamineOral:Ketoconazole 200mg, Itraconazole 100-200mg and Fluconazole 150mg

Question: Female presents with history of color change from pallor to cyanosis on exposure to cold in fingers. This condition is mostly associated with?
A. Scleroderma
B. Leukemia
C. Lung infections
D. Hepatosplenomegaly
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: A. i.e. Scleroderma Raynaud's phenomenon (i.e. cold/vibration/emotional stress-exposure Vt pallor --> cynosis & finally erythemaQ of digits, ear & tip of nose) is almost always present (along with skin sclerosis) and is often earliest featureQ of Systemic sclerosis (Scleroderm). It may precede extensive skin & internal organ involvement by week-months (in diffuse SS) to years (in limited cutaneous SS).

Question: Which of the following can lead to infiltration of ear lobules, loss of nails and resorption of distal phalanges?
A. Tuberculoid leprosy
B. Lepromatous leprosy
C. Indeterminate leprosy
D. Any of the above
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. B. Lepromatous leprosy. (Ref. Harrison's 18th/pg. 1362)LEPROSYSpecific symptoms vary depending on the type of leprosy.# Tuberculoid leprosy: A rash appears, consisting of one or a few flat, whitish areas. Areas affected by this rash are numb because the bacteria damage the underlying nerves.# Lepromatous leprosy: Many small bumps or larger raised rashes of variable size and shape appear on the skin. There are more areas of numbness than in tuberculoid leprosy, and certain muscle groups may be weak. Much of the skin and many areas of the body, including the kidneys, nose, and testes, may be affected due to heavy bacillary infiltration.# Borderline leprosy: Features of both tuberculoid and lepromatous leprosy are present. Without treatment, borderline leprosy may become less severe and more like the tuberculoid form, or it may worsen and become more like the lepromatous form.Lepromatous leprosy# There are countless disseminated macules and/or skin nodules, with blurred outlines and sometimes joining to form larger plaques.# No tendency to central healing is seen and there is no hypopigmentation, although sometimes a "copper colour" is present. The infiltrated skin nodules do exhibit less or no anaesthesia, but numbness develops in the hands and feet.# The skin infiltration may lead to diffuse skin thickening, chiefly of the ears, lips and forehead.# Infiltration of the mucosa leads to chronic rhinitis with epistaxis, septum perforation and destruction of the nasal cartilages. The tongue is thickened and there may be hoarseness.# The upper incisors become loose and often drop out. There is often loss of the eyebrows (madarosis) and eyelashes. The central portion of the forehead (frontalis muscle) is more affected than the lateral portions. The sensory loss on the forehead can be quite marked (since the skin is relatively cool) but at the hairline, there tends to be an abrupt increase in the sensitivity to pinprick.# Testicular atrophy leads to gynaecomastia. The nerves are not severely thickened, but involvement of the nerves is extensive, generalised, gradual and symmetrical.# The consequences of this loss are evident later in the disease and sensory dysfunction, rather than motor defects, are foremost. Deep tendon reflexes are preserved for a long time, which distinguishes this diseases from many other neuropathies (except amyloidosis).# Vibration sense and position sense remain intact for a long time. With progression of the disease, the motor branches of small nerves are invaded, so that there is distal atrophy, especially in the hands.Clinical Features of TestTT FormLL FormSkin lesionsNumberOne or fewNumerousSensationAbsentNot affectedSurfaceDry or scalyShinyHair growth in lesionsAbsentNot affectedNerve enlargementCutaneous nervesommonNot enlargedLarger peripheral nervesVery rareSymmetrilcally enlargedENL reactionDoes not occurCommonLepromin testStrongly positiveNegativeBacillary index05 or 6Skin histology Granuloma cellEpithelioidFoamy histiocyteLymphocytes++++/-Dermal nervesDestroyedEasily visiblePrognosisGoodPoor

Question: Skin involvement in toxic epidermal necrolysis?
A. < 10 %
B. l0 - 20%
C. 20 - 30%
D. > 30%
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ans. is 'd' i.e., > 30% Erythema multiforme It is an acute , often self limited eruption characterized by a distinctive clinical eruption, the hallmark of which is target lesions (Iris lesions). EM can present with wide spectrum of severity which can be classified into 1. Erythema multiforme minor It is simply referred to as erythema multiforme (i.e. if not specified about other 2 types, erythema multiforme means EM minor). Localized eruption of skin with or without mucosal involvement. 2. Steven- Johnson syndrome (SJS) There are mucosal erosions with pruritic macules. In this epidermal detatchment is 10-30% of the body surface area. 3. Toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN) When skin detachment is more then 30% of BSA. It is also called Lyell's syndrome. Therefore TEN & SJS are considered as single syndrome i.e. SJS-TEN syndrome (Erythema multiforme major). If area involved is more than 30% it is TEN & if area involved is 10-30%, it is SJS.

Question: Hypopigmented patches can be seen in :
A. Becker naevus
B. Freckles
C. Nevus Ito
D. Nevus anemicus
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: D i.e. Naevus anemicus

Question: Treatment of erythematous skin rash with multiple pus lakes in a pregnant woman is:
A. Coicosteroids
B. Retinoids
C. Methotrexate
D. Psoralen with PUVA
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: A i.e. Coicosteroids

Question: Chancroid is caused by:
A. Treponema pallidum
B. Leishmania donovani
C. Haemophilus ducreyi
D. Donovania granulomatis
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. c (Haemophilus ducreyi). (Ref. Textbook of microbiology by Ananthanarayan 6th/ 311.)VulvovaginitisAdherent yellowish discharge, pH >5, fishy amine odor in KOH, clue cells, gram - cell dominateBacterial vaginosisOvergrowth of Gardnerella vaginalis, anaerobesClue cells, gram - rodsMetronidazoleVulvovaginitis, pruritus, erythema, discharge with consistency of cottage cheeseCandida spp.Antibiotic use-* overgrowth, immunocom promisedGerm tube test, gram + yeasts in vaginal fluidsNystatin, miconazole"Strawberry cervix" foamy purulent discharge; many PMNs and motile trophozoites microscopically (corkscrew motility)Trichomonas vaginalisVaginitis with dischargePear-shaped trophozoites with corkscrew motilityMetronidazoleEducational points: STDCAUSATIVE AGENTDIAGNOSISTREATMENT1.Chancroid (Soft sore)H. ducreyi"School of fish"/Rail road trackErythromycin/Cotrimazole2.L6VChlamydiae trachomatis (L1< L2, and L3)Culture of LGV strain from node or rectum, occa-sionally from urethra or cervix; NAAT for C. trachomatis from these sites; LGV CF titer, 1:64; micro-IF titer, 1:512.Tetracycline3.Syphilis (Hard chancre)T. pallidumDark ground microscopyPenicillin4.Genital herpesH. simplex2HSV infection is best confirmed in the laboratory by detection of virus, viral antigen, or viral DNA in scrapings from lesions.Acyclovir5.Donovaniasis(Granuloma inguinale)Calymmto- bacterium granulomatisSmears can be examined in a clinical setting by direct microscopy with a rapid Giemsa or Wright's stain. Donovan bodies can be seen in large, mononuclear (Pund) cells as gram-negative intracytoplasmic cysts filled with deeply staining bodies that may have a safety-pin appearance.Erythromycin6.GonorrhoeaN. gonorrheaA rapid diagnosis of gonococcal infection in men may be obtained by Gram's staining of urethral exudates.PenicillinCeftriaxone (For disseminated gonorrhoea)7.TrichomoniasisT. vaginalis"Strawberry vagina & Cx"metro/tinidazole8.Bacterial vaginosisGarnerellaVaginalis"Clue cells"LeucocytopeniaReduced lactobacilliMetronidazole/ Clindamycin

Question: Miyagawa body is characteristically seen in
A. Kala azar
B. Syphilis
C. Granuloma inguinale
D. LGV
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: (D) LGV # MIYAGAWA BODIES:> Chlamydia trachomatis (Miyagawa Nella lymphogranulomatosis), the elementary bodies that develop in the intracytoplasmic mi- crocolonies of Lymphogranuloma Venereum.> Lab diagnosis of LGV (Lymphogranuloma Venereum):> The primary lesion usually goes unnoticed and the disease is seen commonly first in the stage of inguinal adenitis (bubo).> Smears of material aspirated from the buboes may show the elementary bodies (Miyazawa's granular corpuscles).> The sensitivity of microscopic diagnosis is very low.> Isolation of the chlamydia by intracerebral inoculation into mice and into yolk sac of eggs has been replaced by cell cultures.> LGV patients develop high titres of circulating antibodies, with titres of 1:64 or more in CF test and 1:512 or more in micr - IF.> Serological diagnosis is therefore feasible. An intradermal test originally described by Frei in 1825 was commonly used formerly.

Question: Microdermasion is done with:
A. Aluminium oxide crystals
B. Aluminium trihydrate crystals
C. Ferrous oxide crystals
D. Ferric oxide crystals
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Microdermabrasion is resurfacing technique with superficial skin wound achieved with aluminium oxide crystals. Ref: Textbook of dermatosurgery & cosmetology, Satish S savant, E-2, P-620.

Question: Which of the following is the reason for the development of a simple lentigo?
A. Increased melanin
B. Increased melanocytes
C. Increased melanosomes
D. All of the above
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. B. Increased melanocytesSimple lentigo occurs due to an increase in melanocytes at dermal-epidermal junction.* Simple Lentigo also known as Lentigo simplex is a light- to dark-brown or black macule that does not fade away once it appears.* They usually appear during childhood and increase in number until the age of 40.* It is more common in individuals with red hair and fair skin.Lentigo simplex: Hyperpigmentation is evident in the basal and squamous epidermal cells. There is a slight increase in non-atypical melanocytes between the epidermal basal cells. Magnification 40x(H&E).

Question: A 35-year-old woman develops an itchy rash over her back, legs, and trunk several hours after swimming in a lake. Erythematous, edematous papules are noted. The wheals vary in size. There are no mucosal lesions and no swelling of the lips. The most likely diagnosis is
A. Urticaria
B. Folliculitis
C. Erythema multiforme
D. Erythema chronicum migrans
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: (a) Source: (Braunwald, 15/e, pp 318, 323, 822, 1061, 1917-1918.) Urticaria, or hives, is a common dermatologic problem characterized by pruritic, edematous papules and plaques that vary in size and come and go, often within hours. Mast cells may be stimulated by heat, cold, pressure, water, or exercise. Immunologic mechanisms can also cause mast cell degranulation. Folliculitis caused by Pseudomonas aeruginosa can cause a rash, often after exposure to hot tubs. The lesions would not be as diffuse, with a line of demarcation depending on the water level. These lesions are pustular and occur 8 to 48 h after soaking. Erythema multiforme produces target-like lesions and oral blisters often secondary to medications. Erythema chronicum migrans usually presents with a large, solitary annular lesion.

Question: A 35-year-old male presents with bald patches and with no scars. The patches are well demarcated with broken hair at the edges. Diagnosis is:
A. Alopecia areata
B. Androgenic alopecia
C. DLE
D. Telogen effluvium
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. a. Alopecia areataAlopecia areata is a form of non-scarring alopecia with the edges showing coudability sign and exclamation hairsAndrogenic alopecia presents with diffuse involvement of frontotemporal regions and vertex, sparing occiputTelogen effluvium presents with diffuse involvement of scalp, with a history of a precipitating factor 3-4 months earlier, e.g. severe febrile illness, crash dieting, mental stress etc.

Question: Multidrug therapy is given for
A. Syphilis
B. Leprosy
C. Herpetiformis
D. Icthyosis Vulgaris
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: B i.e. Leprosy

Question: Air-borne contact dermatitis can be diagnosed by:
A. Skin biopsy
B. Patch test
C. Prick test
D. Estimation of serum IgE levels
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans: B (Patch test) Ref: Eczema. In: Thappa DM. editor. Essentials in Dermatology, 2nd,edn.. New Delhi: jaypee brothers medical publishers (P) Ltd 2009:99-113. & Atopic dermatitis. Eczema and non infectious immunodeficiency disorders. In: James WD. Berger TG, Elston DM. editors. Andrew's diseases of the skin: Clinical Dermatology, 11th edn., China: Saunders Elsevier 2011: 62-87.Explanation:Patch test - Application of allergens suspected to be the cause of allergic contact dennatitis to intact uninflamed skin in non irritating concentrationDiagnostic of allergic contact dermatitis (airborne contact dermatitis is a type of allergic contact dermatitis wherein the allergens are airborne like pollen, cement, etc)Patch test - Delayed hypersensitivity (type IV hypersensitivity)Reading done two days laterPrick testType I hypersensitivity reaction, used to detect allergy to a host of allergens like food, dust, insects, drugs, etcDone in atopic dermatitis, chronic urticaria, allergic rhinoconjunctivitis, bronchial asthmaReading done in 15 minutesSerum IgE levels are non specifically elevated in allergic conditions characteristically high levels are seen in atopic dermatitis and very high levels in hyper IgE syndromeSkin biopsy reveals nonspecific features of spongiosis seen in all cases of dermatitis and not specific for airborne contact dermatitis.

Question: An eleven year old boy is having tinea capitis on his scalp. The most appropriate line of treatment is:
A. Oral griseofulvin therapy
B. Topical griseofulvin therapy
C. Shaving of the scalp
D. Selenium sulphide shampoo
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: A i.e. Oral griseofulvin Tenia capitis is most commonly caused by Microsporum canis > Trichophyton tonsurans; and never caused by Epidermophyton as it does not involve hair. It presents with localized non-cicatrial (mostly) alopecia, itching, scaling with or without boggy swelling of scalp & easily pluckable hair. Tinia capitis is diagnosed by potassium hydroxide (KOH) wet mounts of hair & scale and treated by griseofulvin. Griseofulvin is used systemically only for dermatophytosis, it is ineffective topically. It is the drug of choice for treatment of tinea requiring systemic therapy. Griseofulvin has no role in treatment of Tinea versicolar & candida.

Question: HLA associated with Dermatitis herpetiform is:
A. HLA A5
B. HLA B27
C. HLA B8
D. HLA A28
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. C. HLA B8a. Dermatitis herpetiformis is a disease characterized by erythematous vesicular or bullous lesions and severe itching. The disease most commonly occurs between 20-40 years of age and men are more commonly affected. IgA is deposited in the reticular dermis of the uninvolved skin suggesting an immune etiology.b. More than 90% of patients express the HLA B8/DRW3 and HLA DQW2. It is also associated with gluten sensitive enteropathy. Polymorphism of the eruption (erythematous blotches or stain, grouped vesicle or bullae) and intense itching are characteristic features of the disease.c. The attacks last for weeks or months with intervals of partial remission over a period of years. General health of the patient is unaffected except due to sleeplessness caused by irritation or secondary infection. Although any part of the body may be involved but mucous membranes are involved only in 1% of the cases.d. Distribution is usually bilateral and symmetrical and forearms, thighs, inter-scapular region and buttocks beings most commonly involved. Dapsone is the drug of choice and is given 50mg 1-4 times a day orally.e. Most of the patients are controlled by 100mg daily dose but the require pent varies from time to time. The effect of dapsone is dramatic and rapid with all signs disappearing in 48 hours.f. However, the treatment must be continued indefinitely as it is suppressive and not curative. It is also necessary to treat the patient with a gluten free diet because this reduces the dose of drug required to suppress the eruption.

Question: Non-gonococcal urethritis is caused by: September 2012
A. Chlamydia
B. LGV
C. Syphilis
D. Gardnella vaginalis
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. A i.e. Chlamydia

Question: A 40 year old female presented with numerous, nonitchy, erythematous scaly papules (lesions) on trunk, with few oral white mucosal plaques. She also had erosive lesions in perianal area. The probable diagnosis is
A. Psoriasis
B. Secondary syphilis
C. Lichen planus
D. Disseminated candidiasis
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: B i.e. Secondary syphilis Secondary syphilis presents with generalized, symmetrical, nonitchy, coppery red maculoppular lesions (+- scales) on trunk, extremities and even palm and solesQ. Oral and genital superficial mucosal erosion (patches) are painless silver-grayQ surrounded by red periphery. And warm, moist, interiginous areas (such as perianal area, vulva and scrotum) show large, hyperophic, coalesced gray-white, highly infections papules (Condylomata lata)Q.

Question: "Microabscess of munro" is seen in:
A. Lichen planus
B. Psoriasis
C. Pityriasis rosea
D. Tbberous sclerosis
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans: b (Psoriasis) Ref: Pavithran's textbook of dermatology, p. 14,15Micro abscess of Munro is seen in psoriasis.PsoriasisType IType IIHeriditaryStrong HLA association (HLA CW6)Severe course and early onsetArthropathy more common.SporadicHLA unrelatedMild course and late onsetThe most important locus for psoriasis susceptibility is Psors 1 (psoriasis susceptibility locus on chromosome 6p 21.3.T cells(helper) are fundamental in activating the disease process. The trigger to their activation may be conventional antigens or bacterial superantigens.Histopathology of psoriasis# Parakeratosis# Micro munro abscess-collection of neutrophils in stratum comeum# Spongiform pustules of Kogoj-aggregates of neutrophil in stratum spinosum.# Acanthosis with regular elongation of rete ridges-camel foot appearance.# Edema of dermal papillae with dilated & tortuous capillaries.Treatment of choice for generalized pustular psoriasis & psoriatic erythroderma is-Acetretin

Question: Ash leaf maculae is found in :
A. Tuberous sclerosis
B. Neurofibromatosis
C. Lymphangioma
D. None
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: A i.e. Tuberous sclerosis

Question: Auzpitz sign is seen in -
A. Psoriasis
B. LichenPlanus
C. Alopeciaaerata
D. Lichensclerosus
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. is 'a' i.e., Psoriasis Various bed side tests and signs associated with psoriasis :-1. Grattage test :- Scraping of the psoriasis lesion causes accentuation of silvery scales (due to trapping of air).2 Auspitz's sign :- Scraping of the psoriasis lesion causes accentuation of silvery scales (like in grattage test). If scrapping is continued further, a glistening white membrane (Bulkely's Membrane) appears. On removing this membrane, punctate (pin point) bleeding becomes visible, referred to as auspitz's sign.3. Woronoffs ring: - Occasionally a hypopigmented ring is seen surrounding the lesion, k/a woronofFs ring. Mostly associated with treatment with topical steroids.

Question: A young boy presented with a lesion over his right buttock which had peripheral scaling and central clearing with scarring. The investigation of choice would be:
A. Tzank smear
B. KOH preparation
C. Biopsy
D. Sabourad's agar
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: C i.e. Biopsy

Question: The chestnut coloured fungal cells known as muriform bodies are seen in:
A. Sporotrichosis
B. Phaeohyphomycosis
C. Chromoblastomycosis
D. Lobomycosis
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Muriform cells are also called chromo/medlar/copper penny/ sclerotic bodies. They are chestnut/golden brown colored fungal cells found mainly in giant cells in infiltrate of chromoblastomycosis. Ref: Rook's Textbook of Dermatology, 8th Edition, Page 36.75.

Question: An infant presented with erythematous lesions on cheek and extensor aspect of upper and lower limbs. There is a family history of Asthma. The probable diagnosis is:
A. Air borne contact dermatitis
B. Atopic dermatitis
C. Seborraehic dermatitis
D. Infectious eczematoid dermatitis
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: History of atophy (asthma) in family, with erythematous lesions on face (cheek) and extensor surface of limbs is suggestive of atopic dermatitis. Ref: Pediatric Allergy, Asthma And Immunology By Arnaldo Cantani, 2008, Page 511; Harrison's Principles of Internal Medicine 16th Edition, Page 268; Roxburgh's Common Skin Diseases 17th Edition, Page 105-112; Illustrated textbook of dermatology: Pasricha 3rd Edition, Page 152; Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in General Medicine 6thEdition, Page 1181-1203; Rooks Textbook of Dermatology 7th Edition, Page 18.1-18.30

Question: True about Lucio's phenomenon is-
A. Associated with tuberculoid leprosy
B. Occurs as side effect of treatment of leprosy
C. Ischemic necrosis
D. Also known as type 2 Lepra reaction
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. is 'c' i.e. Ischemic necrosis * Lucio's phenomenon is seen in untreated cases of lepromatous leprosy.Lucio's phenomenon* Lucio's phenomenon is seen in lepromatous leprosy (LL). It occurs in patients who are untreated. Patients develop recurrent crops of large sharply marginated, ulcerative lesions, particularly on lower extrimities. It is due to heavy parasitism of endothelial cell, endothelial proliferation and thrombus formation which lead to ischemic necrosis.

Question: All are true about Dermatitis herpetiformis EXCEPT:
A. The lesions are intensely itchy
B. Lesions have epidermal bullae
C. IgA in Papillary tips
D. Associated with gluten enteropathy
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Lesions have epidermal bullae REF: Fitzpatrik dermatology 6th ed p. 558-73 Dermatitis herpetiformis (DH) is an intensely pruritic, papulovesicular skin disease characterized by lesions symmetrically distributed over extensor surfaces (i.e., elbows, knees, buttocks, back, scalp, and posterior neck). Almost all DH patients have an associated, usually subclinical, gluten-sensitive enteropathy , and >90% express the HLA-B8/DRw3 and HLA-DQw2 haplotypes. DH may present at any age, including childhood; onset in the second to fouh decades is most common. The disease is typically chronic. Biopsy: Small intestine shows paial villus atrophy Skin lesions show sub-epidermal bullae and papillary tip abscess , IgA in papillary tips (on DIF) Treatment: Dapsone and gluten free diet

Question: The average number of adult female mites on an individual suffering from the common form of scabies is about:
A. 2
B. 12
C. 16
D. 24
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: The average number of adult female mites on an individual suffering from the common form of scabies is about 12. Only in crusted (Norwegian) scabies are large numbers of mites present. Ref: Rook's textbook of dermatology, 8th edition Pg 38.37.

Question: Nail is involved in:
A. Psoriasis
B. Lichen planus
C. Fungal infection
D. All
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: A i.e., Psoriasis B Lichen planus C i.e., Fungal infection

Question: DOC for Tenia Ungum
A. Ampthotericin B
B. Miconazole
C. Gresiofulvin
D. Nystatin
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: C i.e. Griseofulvin

Question: Mycosis fungoides: March 2013
A. Cutaneous T cell lymphoma
B. Fungal infection
C. Bacterial infection
D. Cutaneous B cell lymphoma
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. A i.e. Cutaneous T cell lymphoma Mycosis fungoides Mycosis fungoides is also known as: Cutaneous T cell lymphoma, Special features: - MC skin lymphoma, - Pautrier's microabscesses - Presents with diffuse erythroderma

Question: A 2 year old born out of consanguineous marriage, had a history of the collodion membrane. He had large, thick, plate-like brown scaling generalized distribution; no erythroderma and ectropion. Which disease is it?
A. Ichthyosis vulgaris
B. Lamellar ichthyosis
C. X linked ichthyosis
D. Netherton syndrome
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. B. Lamellar ichthyosisLamellar ichthyosis (LI)* Collodion baby at birth as the baby is covered by a thickened collodion-like membrane which is then shed* Scaling occurs over the whole body, including creases and bends* The scale in LI is typically large, dark brown or grey and firmly adherent* Drooping of lower eyelids (ectropion), palmoplantar keratoderma and scarring alopecia may be seen in severe cases.* Limitation of joint movement, flexion contractures, and digital sclerodactyly may result. Nails may be small but hair shaft, mucous membranes and teeth are not affected.* May be associated with a mutation in transglutaminase 1 gene.

Question: Which of the following is responsible for protection from ultraviolet rays: September 2011
A. Stratum corneum
B. Langerhans cells
C. Apocrine sweat glands
D. Melanocyte
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ans. D: Melanocyte Structure involved in protection against ultraviolet radiation is melanin produced by melanocytes and transferred to keratinocytes

Question: All are included in Amsler's criteria, EXCEPT:
A. Vaginal pH <4.5
B. Positive amine test
C. Clue cells> 20% of total vaginal epithelial cells
D. Homogenous thin discharge
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Amsler's criteria used for the diagnosis of bacterial vaginosis is based on clinical & lab indicators: Vaginal pH >4.5, alkaline Positive amine test Clue cells> 20% of total vaginal epithelial cells Homogenous thin discharge Scanty / absent lactobacilli 3 out of 5 criteria suggests this diagnosis Ref: Sexually transmitted infections, Bhushan Kumar, 2nd edition pg 673.

Question: A 25-yr man C/O recurrent episodes of flexural eczema, contact urticaria, recurrent skin infections & severe abdominal cramps & diarrhea upon taking sea foods. He is suffering from:
A. Seborrheic dermatitis
B. Atopic dermatitis
C. Airborne contact dermatitis
D. Nummular dermatitis
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. B. Atopic dermatitisAtopic dermatitis is a very common, extremely itchy disorder of unknown cause which characteristically, but not always, affects the face and flexures of infants, children, adolescents and young adults. Foods, inhaled allergens, bacterial infection, reduced humidity; excessive sweating and irritants cart exacerbate pruritus and scratching.

Question: A young male presents with painful ulcers on the mouth and glans penis with blurred vision and history of recurrent epididymitis. Which of the following is the most probable diagnosis?
A. Behcet syndrome
B. Oculocutaneous aphthous ulcer syndrome
C. Fabry's disease
D. Epidermolysis bullosa
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. a. Behcet's syndromeHistory of painful oral and penile ulcers with ocular involvement in form of blurring of vision points towards Behcet's disease but confusion arises out of history of recurrent epididymitis, which is solved by Harrison's which states; "Epididymitis is seen in 5% of patients of Behcet's syndrome"Behcet's syndrome is a multisystem disorder presenting with recurrent oral and genital ulcerations as well as ocular involvement.

Question: The most effective treatment of pruritus in uremia is :
A. Ultraviolet light
B. Cholestyramine
C. Eskazine
D. Topical benzocaine
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: A. i.e. Ultraviolet light

Question: Nerves are not involved in ?
A. Tuberculoid leprosy
B. Lepromatous leprosy
C. Indeterminate leprosy
D. Borderline tuberculoid leprosy
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. is 'c' i.e., Indeterminate leprosy

Question: Acantholysis is characteristic of:
A. Pemphigus vulgaris
B. Pemphigoid
C. Erythema multoforme
D. Dermatitis herpetiformis
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: A i.e. Pemphigus Vulgaris

Question: Acantholysis is:
A. Lysis of basale cell layer
B. Separation of keratinocytes
C. Thickening of granular layer
D. Thickening of corneum layer
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. (b) Separation of keratinocytesRef: Harrison 19th ed. / 370* Keratinocytes are connected to one another by intracellular desmosomal bridges.* If there is loss of these desmosomal bridges, it will lead to separation of keratinocytes and the condition is known as acantholysis.* If separation continues, there will be intracellular edema, and the condition is known as Ballooning.Also Know* Degeneration of stratum basale is seen in: Lichen planus* Acanthosis: thickening of stratum spinosum* Hypergranulosis: Thickening of stratum granulosum* Hyperkeratosis: Thickening of stratum corneum* Parakeratosis: persistence of nucleus in stratum corneum layer

Question: U-serrated pattern in direct immunofluorescence is seen in:
A. Epidermolysis bullosa acquisita
B. Bullous pemphigoid
C. Linear IgA disease
D. Dermatitis herpetiformis
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Epidermolysis bullosa acquisita: Direct immunofluorescence shows, linear IgG, Ig A, Ig M at the basement-membrane zone with diagnostic U-serrated pattern. Patients' skin split through the lamina lucida with 1 mol/L salt demonstrates the IgG antibodies to be bound to the dermal aspect of the blister. N serrated pattern is seen in bullous pemphigoid. Ref: Rook's textbook of dermatology, 8th edition, Pg 40.53.

Question: Which of the following tuberculoides is characterized by involvement of sweat glands & hair follicle with non caseating epithelioid granuloma?
A. Lichen scrofulosorum
B. Miliary tuberculosis
C. Papulonecrotic tuberculide
D. Lupus vulgaris
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. A. lichen scrofulosorumHistopathology of Lichen scrofulosorum shows hair follicle infiltrated with mononuclear cells and occasional epithelioid cells, and upper dermal granuloma formed by mononuclear cells and epithelioid cells. Ziehl-Neelsen may demonstrate AFB.

Question: Black piedra is caused by ?
A. Piedraia hoae
B. Trichosporon asahi
C. Trichosporon ovoides
D. Trichosporon inkin
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. is 'a' i.e., Piedraia hoae Piedra is an asymptomatic superficial fungal infection of the hair shaft also known as trichomycosis nodu- laris. Black piedra is caused by Piedraia hoae, whereas white piedra is caused by pathogenic species of the Trichosporon genus, namely Trichosporon asahii, Trichosporon ovoides, Trichosporon inkin, Trichosporon mucoides, Trichosporon asteroides, and Trichosporon cutaneum.

