Question: All of the following are surgical options for morbid obesity except -
A. Adjustable gastric banding
B. Biliopancreatic diversion
C. Duodenal Switch
D. Roux en Y Duodenal By pass
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ans. is 'd' i.e., Roux en Y Duodenal Bypass Bariatric surgical procedures include:a. Vertical banded gastroplastyb. Adjustable gastric bandingc. Roux-en Y gastric bypass (Not - Roux-en Y Duodenal Bypass)d. Biliopancreatic diversione. Duodenal switcho The surgical treatment of morbid obesity is known as bariatric surgery.o Morbid obesity is defined as body mass index of 35 kg/m2 or more with obesity related comorbidity, or BMI of 40 kg/m2 or greater without comorbidity.o Bariatric operations produce weight loss as a result of 2 factors. One is restriction of oralintake. The other is malabsorbtion of ingested food.o Gastric restrictive procedures include Vertical banded gastroplasty & Adjustable gastric bandingo Malabsorbtive procedures include Biliopancreatic diversion, and Duodenal switcho Roux-en Y gastric bypass has features of both restriction and malabsorptionBariatric Operations: Mechanism of ActionRestrictiveVertical banded gastroplastyLaparoscopic adjustable gastric bandingLargely Restrictive/Mildly MalabsorptiveRoux-en-Y gastric bypassLargely Malabsorptive/Mildly RestrictiveBiliopancreatic diversionDuodenal switch

Question: Per rectum examination is not a useful test for diagnosis of
A. Anal fissure
B. Hemorrhoid
C. Pilonidal sinus
D. Rectal ulcer
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: PILONIDAL SINUS/DISEASE (Jeep Bottom; Driver's Bottom) Pilus--hair; Nidus--nest It is epithelium lined tract, situated sho distance behind the anus, containing hairs and unhealthy diseased granula- tion tissue. It is due to penetration of hairs through the skin into subcutaneous tissue. It forms granuloma/unhealthy granulation tissue in the deeper plane. It is of infective origin and occurs in sacral region between the buttocks, umbilicus, axilla. Other indications of per rectal examination are:Carcinoma rectum, Stricture rectum, Polyps, BPH and carcinoma prostate, Secondaries in the rectovesical pouch (Blumer shelf), Sphincter tone, Pelvic abscess (is felt as boggy swelling), to feel the internal opening of anal fistulas, in bimanual palpation of the bladder or pelvic tumours, in acute abdominal conditions--it reveals dilated empty rectum with tenderness.Reference : page 967 and 952 SRB's manual of surgery 5th edition

Question: A 60 yr old chronic smoker presents with painless gross hematuria of 1 day duration. Investigation of choice to know the cause of hematuria
A. USG
B. X-ray KUB
C. Urine routine
D. Urine microscopy for malignant cytology cells
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Urine microscopy for malignant cytology "Painless haematuria is by far the most common symptom of bladder cancer and should be regarded as indicative of a bladder carcinoma until proven otherwise." Bailey & Love 25/e p1336 (24/e p1363) Cigarette smoking is the main etiological factor and accounts ,for about 50% of bladder cancers Among the given options 'urine microscopy' is the best choice for investigating a pt. with high suspicion for bladder ca. This is not a good screening test but a positive result is highly specific. The best investigation would be cystoscopy & biopsy. Investigations for bladder cancer 1. Urinary cytology - Exfoliated cells from both normal and neoplastic urothelium can be readily identified in voided urine. Examination of cytological specimens can detect the malignant cells either at the time of initial presentation or during follow-up. Cytological examination may be especially useful in screening high-risk population and assessing the response to treatment. 2. Cystourethroscopy and tumor resection - The diagnosis and initial staging of bladder cancer is made by cystoscopy and transurethral resection. 3.Imaging (IVP, CT, MRI) - Although various imaging techniques can detect bladder cancer, its presence is confirmed by cystoscopy & biopsy. - Therefore imaging modalities are used to image the upper urinary tract and, when infiltrating bladder tumors are detected to assess the depth of muscle wall infiltration and the presence of local & distant metastasis. - Intravenous urography remains one of the most common imaging tests for the evaluation of hematuria. However, intravenous pyelography is increasingly being replaced by computed tomography (CT) urography, which is more accurate, for evaluation of the entire abdominal cavity, renal parenchyma, and ureters in patients with hematuria. Bladder tumors may be recognized as pedunculated, radiolucent filling defects projecting into the lumen; nonpapillary, infiltrating tumors may result in fixation or flattening of the bladder wall. 4. Urinary tumor markers - - Several new tests have been developed in order to overcome the shocomings of urinary cytology such as the low sensitivity for low-grade superficial tumors and inter-observer variability. - Commercially available tests include, the BTA test, the BTA stat test, the BTA TRAK assay determination of urinary nuclear matrix protein (NMP22), Immunocyt and UroVysion . - These tests can detect cancer specific proteins in urine (BTA/NMP22) or augment cytology by identifying cell surface or cytogenetic markers in the nucleus. Other tests under investigation include identification of the Lewis X antigen on exfoliated urothelial cells, and the determination of telomerase activity in exfoliated cells. - These tests have been demonstrated to enhance detection of bladder cancer when used either individually or in combination with cytology. They have been used to detect both new index tumors as well as recurrent tumors.

Question: Testicular artery usually arises from
A. Abdominal aorta below renal artery
B. Renal artery
C. Internal iliac artery
D. Ext iliac artery
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans) a (Abdominal aorta ....) Ref Chaurasia vol 2 pg 186Testicular artery is a branch of abdominal aorta given off at the level of vertebrae L2.Venous drainageVeins emerging from the testis forms pampiniform plexus. Plexus condenses into 4 veins at the superficial inguinal ring & into 2 veins at the deep inguinal ring.Ultimately one vein is formed which drains into IVC (on right side) or left renal vein (on left side).

Question: Which of the following bacterial meningitis is associated with sudural effusion?
A. H. influenza
B. Neisseria meningitits
C. Streptococcus pneumonia
D. Enterococcus
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Chronic Subdural Empyema It may be primary infection of subdural space from sinusitis focus causing suppuration and pus formation. It can be complication of the chronic subdural haematoma. It is due to secondary bacterial infection of collected clot/fluid. Infection is from sinusitis scalp (common)/through earlier trauma wound/haematogenous. Commonly Gram positive organisms cause empyema like streptococci (viridans/milleri) but other virulent organisms like Gram negative bacteria (H.influenzae) occasionally can cause. There is coical venous thrombophlebitis and coical infarction. Headache, fever, meningism and convulsions are the features. MRI is ideal than CT to diagnose. Treatment: Antibiotics, craniotomy and drainage; anticonvulsants, ICU care, proper monitoring, regular follow up. Condition has got 10% moality. Ref: SRB's Manual of Surgery 5th edition Pgno : 1097

Question: An Isograft indicates transfer of tissues between -
A. Unrelated donors
B. Related donors
C. Monozygotic twins
D. From the same individual
Correct Answer: C

Question: Which of the following muscle is not a hybrid muscle
A. Pectoralis major
B. Extensor digitorum
C. Flexor digitorum profundus
D. Brachialis
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Extensor digitorum Hybrid muscles are the muscles having more than one nerve supply Pctoralis major: lateral & medial pectoral nerves Brachialis: additional proprioceptive fibres from radial nerve, in addition to its muscular nerve, musculocutaneous nerve. Extensor digitorum is supplied by the posterior interosseous nerve only.

Question: Delayed union of fracture of a bone follo-wing a surgical treatment may be due to
A. Infection
B. Inadequate circulation
C. Inadequate mobilization
D. All of the above
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: D i.e. All

Question: During extraction of the upper first molar, the mesio buccal root is missing and is suspected to have been pushed into the maxillary sinus.
The best position for the patient immediately after the incident is
A. To position the patient upright
B. To position the patients in a semi inclined posture to visualize the perforation
C. Trendelenberg position
D. Reverse trendelenberg position
Correct Answer: A

Question: Potter syndrome is not assoiated with
A. Bilateral renal agenesis
B. Bilateral multicystic kidney disease
C. oligohydromnios
D. Polyhydromnios
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Since there is b/l kidney agenesis or cystic disease there is no urine production
leading to oligohydromnios

Question: All are true about Cancer breast, except:
A. Affected sibling is a risk factor
B. Paget's disease of nipple is intraductal type of CA
C. Common in aged nulliparous
D. Increased incidence with prolonged breast feeding
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ans. (d) Increased incidence with prolonged breast feeding* Paget's Disease is a superficial manifest of an underlying Intra ductal carcinoma breast

Question: A 60 yr old chronic smoker presents with painless gross hematuria of 1 day duration. Which is the investigation of choice to know the cause of hematuria?
A. USG
B. X-ray KUB
C. Urine routine
D. Urine microscopy for malignant cytology cells
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: A chronic smoker with painless gross hematuria should be suspected as having bladder cancer. The most common form of bladder cancer is transitional cell carcinoma (TCC). Tobacco use, followed by occupational exposure to various carcinogenic materials such as automobile exhaust or industrial solvents are the most frequent risk factors. Hematuria is the presenting symptom in 85-90% of patients with bladder cancer. It may be gross or microscopic, intermittent rather than constant. Exfoliated cells from both normal and neoplastic urothelium can be readily identified in voided urine. Ref: Scher H.I., Motzer R.J. (2012). Chapter 94. Bladder and Renal Cell Carcinomas. In D.L. Longo, A.S. Fauci, D.L. Kasper, S.L. Hauser, J.L. Jameson, J. Loscalzo (Eds), Harrison's Principles of Internal Medicine, 18e.

Question: Congenital hydrocele is best treated by
A. Eversion of sac
B. Excision of sac
C. Lord's procedure
D. Herniotomy
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Congenital hydrocele is best treated with herniotomy if they do not resolve spontaneously. Established acquired hydrocele often have thick walls. They are treated by subtotal excision of the sac. If the sac is small, thin walled and contains clear fluid, Lord's operation is done. Jaboulay's operation where the sac is eveed with placement of testis in a pouch created by dissection in the fascial planes of the scrotum, is an alternative. Reference : page 1328 Bailey and Love's sho practice of surgery 25th edition and page 1072 SRB's manual of surgery 5th edition

Question: A 19 year old female presents with pain in the neck for 5 days. She is not able to wear tie for her job because of neck pain. H/O fatigue and lethargy for 10 days. She had flu like symptoms 20 days ago which resolved spontaneously. BP 110/80 mmHg, Pulse 48/min. Extremities are cold and dry. Neck is very tender. ECG normal. TSH is elevated. ESR 30 mm/hr. Next appropriate step
A. Atropine injection
B. Levothyroxine administration
C. Aspirin
D. Increase iodine intake in food
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Answer: c) Aspirin (SCHWARTZ 19TH ED, P-1525; SABISTON 19TH ED, P-895)Granulomatous or Subacute or De Quervain's thyroiditisMost commonly occurs in 30- 40 year-old womenStrong association with the HLA-B35Fever with Sudden or gradual onset of neck painH/o preceding URI; Viral etiologyGland - enlarged, tender, firmClassically progresses through four stages: Hyperthyroid-Euthyroid-Hypothyroid-EuthyroidA few patients develop recurrent diseaseEarly stages: | ESR, Tg, T4, and T3 levels are elevated, TSH decreasedDuring Hypothyroid stage: elevated TSHLow radio-iodine uptakeFNAC - multinucleated giant cells of an epithelioid foreign body type and aggregates of lymphocytes activated macrophages, and plasma cellsSelf-limiting diseaseAspirin and NSAIDs are used for pain reliefPrednisolone for severe casesShort-term thyroid replacement may be needed and may shorten the duration of symptoms

Question: Headache, apathy and deteriorating level of consciousness occurring weeks after head injury suggests;
A. Chronic subdral haematoma.
B. Pontine hemorrhage
C. Continuing cerebral.
D. Depressed skull fracture.
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Chronic subdral haematoma

Question: An athelete presented with red coloured urine after 2 days of history of severe exeion. The most probable cause is?
A. Hemoglobinuria
B. Hemosiderinuria
C. Hematuria
D. Myoglobinuria
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Myoglobinuria REF: Harrison's Internal Medicine 17th edition chapter 382, Physiology and pathology of the urine by john dixon p. 49 Red color urine may be due to hemoglobin or myoglobin. In the question clue is given that patient is an athlete who competed in an event which lead to sternous exercise and hence increased myoglobin in the urine. "The states of energy deficiency cause activity-related muscle breakdown accompanied by myoglobinuria, appearing as light-brown- to dark-brown-colored urine"

Question: Carcinoma of the prostate arise from -
A. Central zone
B. Peripheral zone
C. Transitional zone
D. Periurethral zone
Correct Answer: B

Question: A young lady with symptoms of hypehyroidism with elevated T4 and TSH levels. On examination, patient was not experiencing Tachycardia or excessive sweating.Fuher examination reveals bitemporal hemianopia. Next step of management
A. Sta beta blockers immediately
B. Conservative management sufficient
C. Sta antithyroid drugs and wait for symptoms to resolve.
D. Sta antithyroid drugs and do urgent MRI
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Hypehyroidism with elevated levels of T4 and TSH levels and bitemporal hemianopia is highly suggestive of TSH secreting adenoma. Urgent MRI should be done to confirm the diagnosis of TSH secreting pituitary adenoma along with antithyroid drugs. Thyrotropin-secreting pituitary tumors (TSH-omas) are a rare cause of hypehyroidism and account for less than 1% of all pituitary adenomas. - Origin - anterior pituitary- MC cause of hyper pituitarism - Pituitary adenoma C/F Functional (Secreting) Non-Functional (Non-Secreting)Early Presentation due to physiologic Delayed presentation (Big enough toeffect cause neurological deficit) | Bitemporal Hemianopia Seen on 3rd / 4th Decade- M = F- MC type of pituitary adenoma is Prolactinoma IOC for diagnosis - MRIOther work-up done Full Endocrinologic ProfileFormal visual field testing TreatmentBromocriptine (Dopamine agonist) -Prolactinoma- Shrink prolactinoma in 6 to 8 weeks- Growth hormone security tumors - shrinkage occur < 20% Pts | Agent Octreotide | GH level in 70% Pts , | Tumor volume in 30% Indications of Sx in pituitary adenoma- GH Secreting tumors- Primarily Cushing Disease- Adenoma causing acute visual deterioration- Non-Prolactin secreting macroadenoma causing symptoms by mass effect Surgical ApproachIntranasal Trans-Sphenoidal , Sub labial Indications of Radiosurgery in pituitary adenoma- Used as primary therapy- Adjuvant therapy after subtotal resection- Recurrent disease

Question: Bacterial pyogenic parotitis affecting the parotid gland is most common after: March 2008
A. Uveo-parotid fever
B. Mumps
C. Debilitation after major surgery
D. After administration of iodine
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. C: Debilitation after major surgery Acute bacterial parotitis is now infrequent, but its historical impoance. Mumps and bacterial parotitis were differentiated by 1800, but neither was effectively treated. The moality rate for bacterial parotitis was 80%. Before antibiotics and intravenous administration of fluids were available, bacterial parotitis occurred in postoperative patients or other severely ill patients who became dehydrated and contributed to their demise as an incurable sepsis.

Question: The commonest site of perforation during colonoscopy is -
A. Caecum
B. Hepatic flexure
C. Splenic flexure
D. Sigmoid colon
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: • Risks of colonoscopy: Perforation and hemorrhage
• MC site of bleeding after colonoscopy: Stalk after polypectomy.
• MC site of perforation during colonoscopy: Sigmoid colon
• Perforation can be caused by excessive air pressure, tearing of the antimesenteric border of the colon from excessive pressure on colonic loops, and at the sites of electrosurgical applications

Question: Trendlenburg's test done for varicose veins is for detection of:
A. Perforator in competency
B. Deep veins patency
C. Saphenofemoral incompetency
D. Site of perforators
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans: C (Saphenofemoral incompetency) Ref : 74 A Manual on Clinical Surgery S. DasExplanation:Clinical Examination of Varicose VeinsBrodie-Trendelenherg TestDone to determine the incompetency of Saphenofemoral valve.Patient is placed in recumbent position.Limbs are raised to empty the veins. Veins are milked proximally for further emptying.Saphenofemoral junction is compressed either with the thumb of the examiner/toumiquet and the patient is asked to stand up quickly.There are two variants of this test.The first method is to assess saphenofemoral incompetency. The pressure is released and if the column of blood fills up quickly from above downwards it indicates saphenofemoral incompetency.The second method is to assess the perforators. Here, the pressure is maintained for one minute. Gradual filling of the veins during this period indicates incompetent perforators allowing reflux of blood from deep veins to superficial veins.Positive Brodie--Trendelenberg test i~ an indication for surgery.Tests to Assess Saphenofemoral IncompetencyBrodie -Trendelenberg testMorrisey's cough impulse testTests to Assess Deep VeinsPerthe's testModified Perthe's testTests to Assess PerforatorsMultiple tourniquet testPratt's testFegan's testBrodie-Trendelenberg testTest to Assess V alves in Superficial VeinSchwartz testNote:Even though Brodie-Trendelenberg test is used to assess both saphenofemoral incompetency and incompetent perforators its primary purpose is to assess saphenofemoral incompetency.

Question: Blood stained sputum may be the only symptom in?
A. Bronchiectasis
B. Carcinoma bronchus
C. Adenoma bronchus
D. Pulmonary T.B.
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. is 'c' i.e., Adenoma bronchus

Question: In which case cystometric study is indicated -
A. Neurogenic bladder
B. Stress incontinence
C. Fistula
D. Urge incontinence
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Cystometric studies are urodynamic studies in which the pressure changes in the bladder is simultaneously measured with bladder filling and during micturition.
It helps in accurate assessment of detrusor and sphincter activity especially if a neurogenic abnormality is suspected.
Though it is also used in stress incontinence but the aim here is to rule out any neurogenic cause.

Question: Iliac crest involvement is common in which condition: March 2007
A. Ankylosing spondylitis
B. Rheumatoid ahritis
C. Reiter's syndrome
D. Osteoahritis
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. A: Ankylosing Spondylitis The basic pathologic lesion of ankylosing spondylitis occurs at the entheses, which are sites of attachment to bone of ligaments, tendons, and joint capsules. Enthesopathy results from inflammation, with subsequent calcification and ossification at and around the entheses. Inflammation with cellular infiltration by lymphocytes, plasma cells, and polymorphonuclear leukocytes is associated with erosion and eburnation of the subligamentous bone. The process usually stas at the sacroiliac joints. Other enthesopathic sites include the iliac crest, ischial tuberosity, greater trochanter, patella, and calcaneum. Ankylosing spondylitis/ AS/ Bechterew's disease/ Bechterew syndrome/ Marie Strumpell disease/Spondyloahritis is a chronic, painful, degenerative inflammatory ahritis primarily affecting spine and sacroiliac joints, causing eventual fusion of the spine. AS is a systemic rheumatic disease and one of the seronegative spondyloahropathies. About 90% of the patients express the HLA-B27 genotype. Men are affected more than women by a ratio in excess of 10:1. Typical signs of progressed AS are the visible formation of syndesmophytes on X-rays and abnormal bone outgrowths similar to osteophytes affecting the spine. Complete fusion results in a complete rigidity of the spine, a condition known as bamboo spine. In 40% of cases, ankylosing spondylitis is associated with iridocyclitis causing eye pain and photophobia. 4.1 AS is also associated with ulcerative colitis, Crohn's disease, psoriasis, and Reiter's disease Other complications are aoic regurgitation, Achilles tendinitis, AV node block and amyloidosis & restrictive lung disease. A clinical examination and X-ray studies of the spine, which show characteristic spinal changes and sacroiliitis, are the major diagnostic tools. The Schober's test is a useful clinical measure of flexion of the lumbar spine performed during examination.

Question: Which of the following statement is false about hydrocele?
A. Arises due to patent processus vaginalis
B. Wait for 5 years for spontaneous closure of congenital hydrocele
C. Lord's plication of sac for small hydrocele
D. Jaboulay's eversion of sac for medium hydrocele
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Treatment of Hydrocele Congenital Hydrocele: Usually spontaneous obliteration by 2 years age. If persists then Herniotomy. Treatment of Vaginal Hydrocele 1. Small hydrocele: Lord's procedure (Plication of sac)Q 2. Medium hydrocele: Jaboulay's procedure (Eversion of sac)Q 3. Large hydrocele: Excision of sacQ

Question: Familial adenomatous polyposis is characterized by all except
A. Autosomal recessive transmission
B. More than 100 polyps in colorectal area
C. Polyps seen in duodenum
D. Extra-intestinal manifestations are present
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) Is a rare, inherited condition caused by a defect in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene - located in 5q 21 chromosome. FAP is autosomal dominant- >50% chance of inheritance in family members Has > 100 adenomatous polyps 100% RISK of malignancy Polyp formation - by 15 yrs. 100% develop malignancy - by 40 yrs. TOC: Total proctocolectomy + ileal pouch-anal anastomosis (TPC + IPAA) M/C/C of death after TPC = Peri-ampullary Ca (polyps in duodenum - periampullary region) Two variants of FAP Gardner's syndrome Osteoma (mandible) Congenital hyperophy of the retinal pigmented epithelium (CHRPE) lesions Sebaceous cysts Benign lymphoid polyposis of ileum Desmoid tumors Supernumerary teeth Turcot's syndrome: Brain tumors Medulloblastoma - m/c associated with FAP Glioblastoma multiforme - m/c associated with HNPCC

Question: In emergency, which aery can be safely ligated ?
A. Internal iliac
B. Popliteal
C. Renal aeryInternal carotid
D. All
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. is 'a' i.e. Internal iliac

Question: Which of the following nerve is involved in Frey's syndrome?
A. Trigeminal
B. Mandibular
C. Ariculo temporal
D. Lingual
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Syndrome (Gustatory Sweating) aka auriculotemporal syndrome: Frey's syndrome arises as a complication of parotid surgery usually manifesting several months after the operation. lt is characterised by sweating and flushing of the preauricular skin during mastication causing nuisance to the person or social embarrassment. It is the result of damage to auriculotemporal nerve and aberrant innervation of sweat glands by parasympathetic secretomotor fibres which were destined for the parotid. Now instead of causing salivary secretion from the parotid, they cause secretion from the sweat glands. The condition can be treated by tympanic neurectomy which intercepts these parasympathetic fibres at the level of middle ear. Some people like to place a sheet of fascia lata between the skin and the underlying fat to prevent secretomotor fibres reaching the sweat glands. Generally, no treatment other than reassurance is required in most of these patients. Also known as Crocodile tears (gustatory lacrimation): There is unilateral lacrimation with mastication. This is due to faulty regeneration of parasympathetic fibres which now supply lacrimal gland instead of the salivary glands. It can be treated by section of greater superficial petrosal nerve or tympanic neurectomy.

Question: Most common complication after ERCP is
A. Acute Pancreatitis
B. Acute cholangitis
C. Acute cholecystitis
D. Duodenal perforation
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Complication perforation(1.3%)/hemorrhage (1.4%),pancreatitis (4.3%) and sepsis (3-30%). Bailey & Love 26th, 208

Question: Which of the following clinical situations is associated with an increase in predominantly conjugated ("direct") bilirubin?
A. Physiologic jaundice of the neonate
B. Kernicterus Following Rhesus Incompatibility
C. Gilbe's Syndrome
D. Pancreatic head tumor
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Of the conditions listed, only pancreatic head tumors are associated with an increase in conjugated ("direct") bilirubin (obstructive jaundice). Increased levels of unconjugated ("direct") bilirubin result from hemolysis over liver defects that impair uptake or conjugation mechanism in liver cells (Gilbe's syndrome, Crigler- Najjar syndrome) positive. Unconjugated bilirubin may cross the immature blood brain Barrier of the newborn and cause Kernicterus. The physiologic jaundice of the newborn observed during the first week of bih is usually mild and due to relatively immature liver conjugation. Ref: Cothren C., Biffl W.L., Moore E.E. (2010). Chapter 7. Trauma. In F.C. Brunicardi, D.K. Andersen, T.R. Billiar, D.L. Dunn, J.G. Hunter, J.B. Matthews, R.E. Pollock (Eds), Schwaz's Principles of Surgery, 9e.

Question: Hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) has an increased risk of all the following except
A. Endometrium
B. Ovary
C. Stomach
D. Pancreas
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer (Lynch syndrome)Hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) is characterised by an increased risk of colorectal cancer and also cancers of the endometrium, ovary, stomach and small intestine.It is an autosomal dominant condition caused by a mutation in one of the DNA mismatch repair genes. The most commonly affected genes are MLH1 and MSH2. The lifetime risk of developing colorectal cancer is 80%, and the mean age of diagnosis is 45 years. Most cancers develop in the proximal colon. Females have a 30-50% lifetime risk of developing endometrial cancerRef: Bailey and Love, 27e, page: 1260

Question: True about primary peritonitis
A. Mostly monobacterial
B. It is chemical peritonitis proceeds secondary peritonitis
C. Needs peritoneal lavage
D. Occurs with Cirrhosis of liver
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: (D) Occurs with Cirrhosis of liver # # PRIMARY (SPONTANEOUS) BACTERIAL PERITONITIS> Peritonitis is either primary (without an apparent source of contamination) or secondary.> The types of organisms found and the clinical presentations of these two processes are different. In adults, primary bacterial peritonitis (PBP) occurs most commonly in conjunction with cirrhosis of the liver (frequently the result of alcoholism).> However, the disease has been reported in adults with metastatic malignant disease, postnecrotic cirrhosis, chronic active hepatitis, acute viral hepatitis, congestive heart failure, systemic lupus erythematosus, and lymphedema as well as in patients with no underlying disease. PBP virtually always develops in patients with ascites.> While enteric gram-negative bacilli such as Escherichia coli are most commonly encountered, gram-positive organisms such as streptococci, enterococci, or even pneumococci are sometimes found.> In PBP, a single organism is typically isolated; anaerobes are found less frequently in PBP than in secondary peritonitis, in which a mixed flora including anaerobes is the rule. In fact, if PBP is suspected and multiple organisms including anaerobes are recovered from the peritoneal fluid, the diagnosis must be reconsidered and a source of secondary peritonitis sought.

Question: According to Spetzler-Main criteria, how much score is given for a 5 cm nidus with AV malformation?
A. 3
B. 4
C. 2
D. 5
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Spetzler-Main AVM grading scale. Graded Feature Points Assigned Size of AVM < 3 cm 3-6 cm >6 cm 1 2 3 Eloquence1 of adjacent brain Noneloquent Eloquent 0 1 Venous drainage Superficial Deep 0 1 'Eloquent areas include: visual, language, and sensorimotor coex; the thalamus and hypothalamus; the internal capsule; the brainstem; the cerebellar peduncles; and the deep cerebellar nuclei.

Question: Splenunculi are commonly seen in
A. Hilum of spleen
B. Tail of spleen
C. Mesocolon
D. Splenic ligaments
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: A. (Hilum of spleen) (1103-B & L 25th)ACCESSORY SPLEEN (Splenunculi) - probably results from a failure of infusion of splenic embryonic tissues* They are located near the hilum of the spleen in 50% of cases and related to the splenic vessels or behind the tail of pancreas in 30%. The remainder are located in the mesocolon or the splenic ligaments* These are functionally similar to the spleen and while performing splenectomy for blood dyscrasias removal of these accessory spleens are obligatory, otherwise there always remains a chance of recurrence* Axis of spleen enlargement projects into- Greater sac**

Question: In which of the following locations, Carcinoid tumor is most common
A. Esophagus
B. Stomach
C. Small bowel
D. Appendix
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: carcinoid tumour commonly occurs in appendix(45%),ileum(25%),rectum(15%).other sites are(15%)other pas of GIT ,bronchus, and testis SRB,5th,877.

Question: Schwann cells are derived from:
A. Neural crest cells
B. Endoderm
C. Mesoderm
D. Ectoderm
Correct Answer: A

Question: Ramachandran is on the surgical ward with non-seminomatous tumor of testis and more than 4 retroperitoneal lymph nodes involved. You are the resident who is making a decision about fuher management. The treatment include all of the following, except:
A. Retroperitoneal Lymph Node Dissection (RPLND)
B. Inguinal orchiectomy
C. Chemotherapy
D. Radiotherapy
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Inguinal orchiectomy with high ligation of the cord at the internal ring is the initial management of testicular tumour. Multi Agent chemotherapy and followed by surgical resection is one modality of treatment. Ref: Bailey & Love, 25th Edition, Page 1269.

Question: Most common type of hypospadias is: September 2011
A. Glandular
B. Penile
C. Coronal
D. Perineal
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. A: Glandular Glandular hypospadias is common and does not usually require treatment Hypospadias: The external meatus opens on the underside of the penis or the perineum, and the inferior aspect of the prepuce is poorly developed (hooded prepuce) Meatal stenosis occurs Bifid scrotum 6 - 10 months of age is the best time for surgery

Question: Mondors disease is:
A. Migratory thrombophlebitis seen in pancreatic Ca
B. Thromboangitis obliterans
C. Thrombosis of deep veins of the leg
D. Thrombophlebitis of superficial veins of breast
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ans: D (Thrombophlebitis of superficial veins of breast) Ref: Bailey dt Love's Short Practice of Surgery, 25th Edition,833-4Explanation:Mondor's diseaseThrombophlebitis of the superficial veins of the breast and anterior chest wallCan also involve armCauseIdiopathicClinical featuresThrombosed subcutaneous vessel , usually attached to the skin - pathognomonic feature.When the skin over the breast is stretched by raising the arm. a narrow, shallow subcutaneous groove alongside the cord becomes apparent.Differential DiagnosesLymphatic permeation from occult carcinomaManagementConservativeRestriction of arm movements is advised.Resolv es within few months without any complicationAssociation with breast carcinoma is Coincidental

Question: Rectal polyp most commonly presents as
A. Obstruction
B. Bleeding
C. Infection
D. Changes into malignancy
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: .LOWER GI BLEED- * Bleeding in the GIT below the level of the ligament of Treitz. * Normal faecal blood loss is 1.2 ml/day. A loss more than 10 ml/day is significant.* Angiodysplasia. * Diveicular disease - commonest cause in Western countries. * Tumours of colon or small bowel. * Anorectal diseases--Haemorrhoids, fissure in ano. * Ulcerative colitis * Crohn's disease. * Colorectal polyps; rectal carcinomas. * Intussusception ref:SRB&;s manual of surgery,ed 3,pg no 925.

Question: A 50 years old lady presented with lump in the left breast, which has developed suddenly in weeks. Perimenstrual symptoms are present. No associated family history. On examination, the lump is well circumscribed, fluctuant, 1.5 cm oval in shape. Most likely diagnosis:
A. Breast cyst
B. Galactocele
C. Fibroadenoma
D. Breast cancer
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Fibroadenoma - it occurs in 2nd to 3rd decade of life Galactocele - it occurs in 3rd to 4th decade of life. Breast cancer - there is no associated family history and lump has developed suddenly hence breast cancer is ruled out. Breast cyst - it occurs in 5th to 6th decade of life. Examination revealed fluctuant lesion which point towards breast cyst. - Often multiple, may be bilateral & can mimic malignancy. Typically present suddenly - Diagnosis can be confirmed by aspiration and / or ultrasound.

Question: Most common type of mesentric cyst is
A. Entergenous cyst
B. Chelolymphalic cyst
C. O mental cyst
D. Urogenital cyst
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Chelolymphalic cyst :

It is commonest type of mesentric cyst.
It has congenital misplaced lymphatic tissue.

Question: Antoni A & Antoni B Pattern's are seen in
A. Schwannoma
B. Neurofibroma
C. Meningioma
D. Teratoma
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Schwannoma *Distinctive histologic patterns seen within the peripheral nerve sheath tumor Schwan noma include the Antoni A and Antoni B regions oThese are the classic microscopic appearances of a schwannoma, which is benign. oNote the more cellular "Antoni A" pattern on the left with palisading nuclei surrounding pink areas (Verocay bodies). On the right is the "Antoni B" pattern with a looser stroma, fewer cells, and myxoid change. oNotice the whirly swirly pattern and how the cell nuclei are closely bunched together ... almost as if they're forming a fence (Verocay bodies). oSchwannomas are benign spindle cell tumors that occur along the edges of peripheral nerves.They can usually be removed without damaging the nerve itself.

Question: Treatment of solitary rectal ulcer are A/E:a) Laxativesb) Rectopexyc) Bandingd) Sclerosant injectione) Enema
A. cd
B. bc
C. bd
D. ac
Correct Answer: A

Question: Features of mycotic aneurysm are all except
A. Bacterial endocarditis is common etiology
B. Commonly it is fusiform aneurysm
C. Aorta and visceral vessels affected commonly
D. Multilobed aneurysm with narrow neck
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Mycotic aneursm is commonly saccular.

Question: Indication for surgery in a case of adrenal incidentaloma
A. Size>5 cm
B. Bilateral adrenal metastasis
C. Functional tumor
D. All of the above
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ref: Bailey&;s 26thE pg: 780. Treatment of Incidentaloma: Any non-functioning adrenal tumour greater than 4 cm in diameter and smaller tumours that increase in size over time should undergo surgical resection. Non-functioning tumours smaller than 4 cm should be followed-up after 6, 12 and 24 months by MRI and hormonal evaluation.

Question: Ulcer with undermined edges is seen in
A. Malignant ulcer
B. Tubercular ulcer
C. Venous ulcer
D. Diabetic ulcer
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Tubercular ulcers typically have undermined edges. Reference: Bailey & Love&;s Sho Practices of Surgery 27th Edition, Page no. 78

Question: Which of the following is NOT associated with elevation of prostatic specific antigen?
A. Acute prostatitis
B. BPH
C. Prostatic intraepithelial neoplasm
D. Prostatic needle biopsy
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Prostatic Intraepithelial Neoplasia ( PIN) is a precancerous condition; not detected by rectal examination, TRUS , or MRI; does not cause rise in PSA level . It is usually identified after TURP for BPH with final histology or by prostatic biopsy.Reference: page1048 SRB&;s manual of surgery 5th edition

Question: Gastrinoma a/w
A. Diarrhoea
B. Constipation
C. Achlorhydria
D. Multiple superficial gastric ulcers
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Diarrhoea is due to hypergastrinaemia.It is associated with severe ulcers,not superficial SRB's manual of surgery,5th edition,710.

Question: Prognostic stage groups in carcinoma breast include all except
A. Tumour size
B. Grade
C. HER-2 status
D. Age
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Prognostic stage groups include TNM plus grading, and status of biomarkers HER-2, ER, and PR Ref: AJCC 8th edition

Question: Persistent vomiting in G.O.O. causes -a) Hyponatremic hyperchloremia occurb) Hypernatremia without ↓ed Cl- alkalosisc) Hypokalemic metabolic alkalosisd) Paradoxical aciduria
A. cd
B. bc
C. bd
D. ac
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Repetitive vomiting leads to hypochloremic, hypokalemic metabolic alkalosis. The urine is alkaline initially but eventually it becomes acidic (paradoxical aciduria)



Cause of paradoxical aciduria 

Initially the kidney compensate for metabolic alkalosis by reabsorbing hydrogen and chloride ions in exchange for sodium, potassium and bicarbonate. But gradually as the body stores of sodium and especially potassium become depleted, kidney starts retaining these ions in exchange of hydrogen ions, thus the urine becomes acidic and metabolic alkaline state is further aggravated.

Question: Complications of therapy with radioactive iodine includes -
A. Thyroid malignancy
B. Hypothyroidism
C. Leukemia
D. All
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. is 'b' i.e. Hypothyroidism

Question: False about hepatic adenoma-
A. Benign lesion
B. OCP use
C. Older females
D. Cold on isotopescan
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans. is 'c' i.e., Older females o Hepatic adenomas are benign solid neoplasms of liver.MC seen in younger females (20-40 years of age)Usually solitaryRisk factor - Prior/current use of estrogens (OCP)o Clinical FeaturesPatients usually present with upper abdominal pain.Physical examinated is usually unrevealing,o Microscopic FeaturesCords of congested or Fat laden hepatocvtes-absent biliary ductules or normal liver architecture,o DiagnosisCT Scan - Well circumscribed heterogenous mass showing early enhancement during arterial phase.MRI Scan - Hyperintense on T, weighted image and enhance early after gadolinium injection,o Isotope Scan - Hepatoma appears cold.o ComplicationsRupture with intraperitoneal bleeding.Malignant transformation (rare) - to HCCo TreatmentHepatic artery embolisation.Resection.

Question: Duhamel procedure is done for -
A. Hirschsprung's disease
B. HPSS
C. Meckels diverticulum
D. Volvulus
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. is 'a' i.e., Hirschsprung's disease * Surgery in Hirschsprung's disease aims to remove the aganglionic segment and 'pull-through' ganglionic bowel to the anus (e.g. Swenson, Duhamel, Soave and transanal procedures) and can be done in a single stage or in several stages after first establishing a proximal stoma in normally innervated bowel.

Question: Position of wrist in cast of colle's fracture is:
A. Palmar detion & pronation
B. Palmar detion & supination
C. Dorsal detion & pronation
D. Dorsal detion & supination
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: A . i.e. Palmar detion & pronation

Question: . Gall stones -
A. Are about twice as common in men as in women
B. There is an increased incidence of stones in diabetics
C. About 80-90% of gall stones are radio-opaque
D. Are usually more than 50 mm in diameter
Correct Answer: B

Question: Surgery for elective hemicolectomy for carcinoma colon is described as -
A. Clean
B. Clean contaminated
C. Dirty
D. Contaminated
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. is 'b' i.e., Clean contaminated

Question: All of the swelling moves with deglutition except: March 2012
A. Thyroglossal cyst
B. Thyroid swelling
C. Branchial cyst
D. Tuberculous lymph nodes
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Ans: C i.e. Branchial cyst Swellings which are adherent to the larynx and trachea moves on swallowing, e.g. thyroid swelling, thyroglossal cyst & subhyoid bursitis. Tuberculous & malignant lymph nodes when they become fixed to the larynx or trachea will also move on deglutition

Question: Hypotension in acute spinal injury is due to:
A. Loss of sympathetic tone
B. Loss of parasympathetic tone
C. Orthostatic hypotension
D. Vasovagal attack
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: • High spinal cord injuries can also result in systemic hypotension because of loss of sympathetic tone.
• The patient will usually have hypotension and relative bradycardia and will show evidence of good peripheral perfusion on physical examination.
• The term neurogenic shock is used but is somewhat of a misnomer because these patients are typically hyperdynamic, with high cardiac output secondary to loss of sympathetic vascular tone.
Treatment
• Hypotension associated with high spinal injury can be treated by alpha-agonist phenylephrine.

Question: Osteoblastic secondaries arises from: March 2003
A. Renal carcinoma
B. Thyroid carcinoma
C. GIT carcinoma
D. Prostate carcinoma
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ans. D i.e. Prostate carcinoma Metastases to bones are usually osteolytic. Osteoblastic lesions are uncommon.

Question: 50 year old male with positive family history of prostate cancer has come to you for a screening test. The screening test done to pickup prostate cancer is
A. DRE
B. PSA
C. DRE + PSA
D. Endorectal coil MRI with T1 and T2 W images
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Prostate-specific antigen (PSA) and Digital rectal examination (DRE) Age 50 for men who are at average risk of prostate cancer and are expected to live at least 10 more years. Age 45 for men at high risk of developing prostate cancer. This includes African Americans and men who have a first-degree relative (father, brother, or son) diagnosed with prostate cancer at an early age (younger than age 65). Age 40 for men at even higher risk (those with more than one first-degree relative who had prostate cancer at an early age).

Question: 40 yr old female presented with breast lump of size 4 cm with involvement of skin and mobile palpable axillary LN, FNAC of lesion showed intrductal carcinoma. What is the initial management of for this pt?
A. Radiotherapy
B. Neo-adjuvant chemotherapy
C. Modified radical mastectomy
D. Simple mastectomy
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: .Locally Advanced Carcinoma of Breast (LABC) * It means locally advanced tumour with muscle/chest wall involvement, extensive skin involvement or fixed axillary nodes. It will be T3, T4a, T4b, T4c or T4d or N2 or N3. * It is investigated by FNAC of tumor, mammography of opposite breast, chest CT, CT abdomen or whole body bone scan. Biopsy is needed to assess receptor status. * Treatment of LACB is always palliative by simple mastectomy, toilet mastectomy, chemotherapy and therapy using tamoxifen. * Initial neoadjuvant chemotherapy; surgery; radiotherapy; adjuvant chemotherapy are other therapeutic plan. ref:SRB&;s manual of surgery,ed 3,pg no 491

Question: Lalita, a female pt. presents with pigmentation of the lips and oral mucosa and intestinal polyps. Her sister also gives the same history. Most probable diagnosis is -
A. Carcinoid tumor
B. Melanoma
C. Villous adenoma
D. Peutz-Jegher syndrome
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ans. is 'd' ie. Peutz-jeghers syndrome Peutz-Jeghers syndorme consists of: hamaomatous polyps throughout the intestine with maximum density in the jejunum* melanosis of the oral mucous membrane and the lips. The melanosis takes the form of melanin spots sometimes presents on the digits and the perianal skin, but the pigmentation of the lips is the sine quanon.

Question: Deformity in transient synovitis of Hip ?
A. Abduction
B. Flexion
C. External rotation
D. All of the above
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ans. is 'd' i.e., All of the above Transient synovitis of Hip Transient synovitis of hip is also known as observation hip, toxic synovitis or irritable hip. Its a self-limiting, inflammatory condition of the synovium, that lasts only a sho time (therefore known as transient) It is the most common cause of hip pain and limp in children under 10 yrs of age. Cause is not known but association has been seen with a recent history of an upper respiratory tract infection. Presentation is with hip pain or limp. The limb is in attitude of slight flexion, abduction and external rotation. The child may have low grade fever. The ESR, C-Reactive protein & WBCs count are normal (This differentiates Transient synovitis from Septic ahiritis a serious condition, in which patient has high grade fever and elevated ESR, C-Reactive protein and WBC count). Radiograph or ultrasound may show widening of the joint space However, most of the time x-ray is normal. Usually the treatment of a clinically suspected case of transient synovitis of hip is Bed rest, NSAIDS and observation. USG guided aspiration is indicated for :- Temperature > 99.5deg F ESR > 20 (Raised ESR) Severe hip pain with ROM

Question: The least common type of intussusceptions is:
A. Multiple
B. Colocolic
C. Ileoileal
D. Ileoileocolic
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Types of Intussusceptions (in decreasing order) Ileocolic (77%) Ileo-ileo-colic (12%) Ilioileal (5%) Colocolic (2%): MC in adults Multiple (1%) Retrograde (0.2%)

Question: The most accurate diagnostic test for Zollinger-Ellison syndrome (ZES) is
A. Fasting serum gastrin
B. Computed tomography (CT) scan
C. Endoscopy
D. Secretin stimulation test
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: -All patients with gastrinoma have an elevated gastrin level, and hypergastrinemia in the presence of elevated basal acid output (BAO) strongly suggests gastrinoma. -Patients with gastrinoma usually have a BAO >15 mEq/h or >5 mEq/h if they have had a previous procedure for peptic ulcer. -Acid secretory medications should be held for several days before gastrin measurement, because acid suppression may falsely elevate gastrin levels. 1). The diagnosis of Zollinger-Ellison syndrome (ZES) is confirmed by the secretin stimulation test. An intravenous (IV) bolus of secretin (2 U/kg) is given and gastrin levels are checked before and after injection. - An increase in serum gastrin of 200 pg/mL or greater suggests the presence of gastrinoma. Patients with gastrinoma should have serum calcium and parathyroid hormone levels determined to rule out multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1) and, if present, parathyroidectomy should be considered before resection of gastrinoma.

Question: Periosteal reaction in a case of acute osteomyelitis can be seen earliest at: March 2012
A. 5 days
B. 10 days
C. 15 days
D. 20 days
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans: B i.e. 10 days The earliest sign to appear on the X-ray is a periosteal new bone deposition (periosteal reaction) at the metaphysis. It takes about 7-10 days to appear Osteomyelitis Earliest site of involvement: Metaphysis Diagnosis of acute OM: Blood culture (positive in 65% cases) Periosteal reaction seen in acute OM appears after: 10 days MC organism in acute OM: Staph. aureus Brodies abscess: - Equilibrium between host & organism; - Abscess cavity remains without fuher enlargement

Question: Risk factor for melanoma are all of the following EXCEPT: March 2013
A. Exposure to UV radiation
B. Black people
C. First degree relative with melanoma
D. Multiple or dysplastic naevi
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. B i.e. Black people Melanoma is commoner in fair complexion Malignant melanoma/ MM Mode of spread of MM: Lymphatic channels or hematogenous Cutaneous melanoma arises from: Epidermal melanocytes MC site involved in lentigo maligna (least common): Face MC type of MM: Superficial spreading Most malignant type of MM: Noduar melanoma

Question: Most common movemnet force involved in fractures of the spine is which of the following?
A. Flexion
B. Extension
C. C Rotation
D. Compression
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Flexion injury is the commonest spinal injury. Ref: Essential ohopedics by Maheshwari 3rd Edition, Page 144,259,260.

Question: The earliest manifestation of increased intracranial pressure following head injury is:
A. Ipsilateral pupillary dilatation
B. Contralateral pupillary dilatation
C. Altered mental status
D. Hemiparesis
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Early signs of elevated iCP include drowsiness and a diminished level of consciousness (altered mental status). Coma and unilateral papillary changes are late signs and require immediate intervention. Ref: Harrison's Internal Medicine, 16th Edition, Page 1633; Clinical Hepatology: Principles and Practice of Hepatobiliary Diseases By Henryk Dancygier, Scott L. (FRW) Friedman, H. D. (CON) Allescher, U. (CON) Beuers, Volume 2, 2010, Page 938

Question: A Poly A base sequence would be most likely found at the
A. 5' end of a prokaryotic messenger RNA (mRNA)
B. 3' end of a prokaryotic mRNA
C. 5' end of a eukaryotic mRNA
D. 3' end of a eukaryotic mRNA
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: The addition of a poly A tail to the 3' end is one of the post-transcriptional modifications that occurs in the processing of eukaryotic messenger RNA (mRNA). A cap consisting of a guanosine derivative is attached to the 5' end. Intervening sequences (introns) are removed by splicing. All of these processing events occur in the nucleus of eukaryotes. Prokaryotic mRNA undergoes none of these modifications.

Question: Failure of migration of neural crest cells is seen in:
A. Albinism
B. Congenital megacolon
C. Odontomes
D. Adrenal tumour
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans: b (Congenital megacolon)Ref: Bailey & Love, 24th ed, p.l 153 & 23rd ed, p. 1027

Question: The signs of malignant transformation in osteochondroma are all except
A. Pain
B. Weight loss
C. Increase in size
D. Increase in thickness of cailage cap
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Ans. b. Weight loss

Question: Investigation of choice for esophageal rupture is
A. Dynamic MRI
B. Rigid esophagoscopy
C. Barium contrast swallow
D. Water soluble low molecular weight contrast swallow
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Gastrografin (water soluble) is preferred to prevent extravasation of barium into the mediastinum or pleura. If no leak is seen, a barium study should follow

Question: Which of the following is false about cholangiocarcinoma
A. Investigation of choices MRCP
B. Staging is done by PET CT
C. Diagnosis is done by CECT
D. Choledochal cyst is a risk factor.
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Diagnosis is made by MRCP

Question: Which of the following is true of Wilson's disease all except -
A. Autosomal recessive
B. Serum ceruloplasmin level < 20 mg/d1
C. Urinary coppor excretion < 100 microgram/c11
D. Zinc acetate is used as maintence therapy
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Urinary copper excretion <100 microgram/di Symptomatic pts. of Wilson disease invariably have urine copper levels > 100 pg per day. Wilson disease is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by mutation in the ATP 7B gene (a copper transpoing ATPase) Diagnosis - The gold standard for diagnosis is Liver biopsy with quantitative copper assayQ. Other diagnostic tests used are ? - Serum ceruloplasmin levelQ - KF rings(2 - Urine copper excretiono - DNA Helpful-ye analysisQ Serum copper values have no diagnostic value, since they may be low, normal or elevated depending upon the stage of evolution of disease. Table : Useful Diagnostic Tests for Wilson Disease Test Normal Value Wilson Disease Serum 180-350 mg/L ceruloplasmin (18-35 mg/d1) * Low in 85% * Present in 99% KF rings Absent - If neurologic or psychiatric symptoms present. * Present in 30-50% - in hepatic presentation and presymptomatic state * Urinary copper excretion is increased 24-h urine Cu 0.3-0.8 mmol - >1.6intn ol(>100mg) in symptomatic patients * 0.9 to > mmol (60 to > 100 mg) - in presymptomatic patients Liver Cu 0.3 -- 0.8 mmol/g * Liver copper is increased (20-50 mg) tissue * > 3.1 mmol (200 mg) Haplotype analysis 0 Matches 2 Matches Treatment Zinc is the treatment of choice for Wilson diseaseQ. It produces a negative copper balance - By blocking intestinal absorption of copper - By inducing hepatic metallothionein synthesis which sequesters additional toxic copper. Table : Recommended Anticopper Treatments for Wilson Disease Disease Status First Choice Second Choice Initial hepatic manifestations Zinc Trientine and zinc Trientine and zinc Hepatic transplantation Trientine Penicillainine and zinc Hepatic transplantation Trientine and zinc * Hepatitis or cirrhosis without decompensation * Hepatitis or Cirrhosis with decompensation - Mild - Moderate - Severe Initial neurologic/psychiatric Tetraioinolybdate and zinc Trientine and zinc Maintenance therapy Zinc Trientine Presymptomatic therapy Zinc Trientine Pediatric Zinc Trientine Pregnant Zinc Trientine

Question: A 35-year-old man with duodenal stump leak after partial gastrectomy is receiving central parenteral nutrition containing the standard D25W, 4.25% amino acid solution. Which is TRUE of essential fatty acid deficiency seen after hyperalimentation?
A. It occurs if soybean oil is given only once weekly.
B. It is usually noted at the end of the first week.
C. It causes dry scaly skin with loss of hair.
D. It is accompanied by hypercholesterolemia.
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Essential fatty acid deficiency usually occurs if hyperalimentation is extended for more than 1 month and when soybean oil is not administered at least twice a week. There is a decrease in linolenic, linoleic, and arachidonic acids and an increase in oleic and palmitoleic acid. In addition to the skin changes, there may be poor wound healing, increased susceptibility to infection, lethargy, and thrombocytopenia. It is characterized by a triene-to-tetraene ratio >0.4.

Question: All are risk factors of squamous cell carcinoma except
A. Ultraviolet radiation
B. Tar
C. Tobacco
D. HPV 18
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Ultraviolet radiation, chronic inflammation, and chemical carcinogens (arsenicals, tar) and infection with HPV 5 and 16.There is also evidence that current and previous tobacco use doubles the relative risk of SCC.Ref: Bailey and Love, 27e, page: 606

Question: Which of the following is TRUE about branchial cyst?
A. Usually seen along the posterior border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle
B. Mostly arises from 2nd branchial system
C. Always present in preschool children
D. Conservatory treatment is indicated
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Branchial cleft cysts usually present as a soft cystic mass along the anterior border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle. These lesions are usually recognized in the second or third decades of life. To prevent recurrent infection and possible carcinoma, they should be completely excised, along with their fistulous tracts. First branchial cleft cysts present high in the neck, sometimes just below the ear. A fistulous connection with the floor of the external auditory canal may be present. Second branchial cleft cysts, which are far more common, may communicate with the tonsillar fossa. Third branchial cleft cysts, which may communicate with the piriform sinus, are rare and present low in the neck. Ref: Lustig L.R., Schindler J.S. (2013). Chapter 8. Ear, Nose, & Throat Disorders. In M.A. Papadakis, S.J. McPhee, M.W. Rabow, T.G. Berger (Eds), CURRENT Medical Diagnosis & Treatment 2014.

Question: Compared to follicular Ca, papillary Ca of thyroid have :a) More male preponderanceb) Bilateralityc) Local recurrence commond) Increased mortalitye) Increased lymph node metastasis.
A. ab
B. bce
C. acd
D. ace
Correct Answer: B

Question: Malignant pustule occurs in -
A. Melanoma
B. Gas gangrene
C. Ovarian tumour
D. Anthrax
Correct Answer: D

Question: In case of hypothyroidism which investigation is most informative and most commonly used:
A. Serum TSH level
B. Serum T3 and T4 level
C. Serum calcitonin assay
D. Serum TRH assay
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: TSH* Most informative among thyroid function test parameters because of ultra-sensitivity* Can detect subclinical hypothyroidism & subclinical hypehyroidism* Hypothyroidism - TSH |* Hypehyroidism - TSH |

Question: An obese 50-year-old woman undergoes a laparoscopic cholecystectomy. In the recovery room she is found to be hypotensive and tachycardic. Her arterial blood gases reveal a pH of 7.29, partial pressure of oxygen of 60 kPa, and partial pressure of CO2 of 54 kPa. The most likely cause of this woman's problem is
A. Acute pulmonary embolism
B. CO2 absorption from induced pneumoperitoneum
C. Alveolar hypoventilation
D. Pulmonary edema
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Because of the ease with which carbon dioxide diffuses across the alveolar membranes, the PaCO2 is a highly reliable indicator of alveolar ventilation. In this postoperative patient with respiratory acidosis and hypoxemia, the hypercarbia is diagnostic of alveolar hypoventilation. Acute hypoxemia can occur with pulmonary embolism, pulmonary edema, and significant atelectasis, but in all those situations the CO2 partial pressures should be normal or reduced as the patient hyperventilates to improve oxygenation. The absorption of gas from the peritoneal cavity may affect transiently the PaCO2 , but should have no effect on oxygenation.

Question: Tardy ulnar nerve palsy occur as a delayed sequele of
A. Supracondylar fracture of humerus
B. Posterior dislocation of elbow
C. Fracture of lateral condyle of humerus in children
D. Fracture of Olecranon
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: C i.e. Fracture lateral condyle humerus

Question: Which of the following is true about venous thrombosis?
A. It affects only the deep venous system
B. Most impoant factor for development of deep venous thrombosis is hospital admission
C. Coralline thrombus is platelet aggregate surrounded by white blood cells
D. Lung infarction is a common complication of deep venous thrombosis
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Answer- B. Most impoant factor for development of deep venous thrombosis is hospital admissionVenous thrombosis is the formation of a semi-solid coagulum within the venous system and may occur in the superficial system.Patients are at risk of dweloping a post-thrombotic limb and venous ulceration Virchow triad-Changes in the wssel wall (endothelial damage)Stasis, which is diminished blood flow through the veinsCoagulability of blood (thrombophilia)The most impoant factor is a hospital admission for the treatment of a medical or surgcal condition.The coralline thrombus then progresses as a propagated loose red fibrin clot, containing many red cells.

Question: A female undergone surgery for left breast cancer 3 yrs back now developed blue nodule on same side
A. Lymphangiosarcoma
B. Recurrence
C. Hemangioma
D. Cellulitis
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Answer- A. LymphangiosarcomaAngiosarcoma is a vascular tumor which may arise de novo in the breast or as a complication of the radiation therapy.

Question: A 4-month-old infant has undergone surgical treatment for meningomyeloencephalocele. At bih, an operation was carried out in the posterior cranial fossa to paially replace brain cerebellar contents to an intracranial position. In investigations for progressive hydrocephalus, it is noted that there is herniation of the cerebellar tonsils through the foramen magnum, and a diagnosis of Arnold-Chiari syndrome is established. This syndrome may also include which of the following?
A. Fusion of the frontal lobes
B. Fusion of the temporal, parietal, and occipital lobes
C. Abnormal elongation of the medulla and lower cranial nerves
D. Paial or complete absence of the pituitary gland
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Abnormal elongation of the medulla and lower cranial nerves may be evident in Arnold-Chiari syndrome. Additional features include fusion of the corpora quadrigemina, leading to a "beaked" tectum; paial or complete absence of the corpus callosum; and microgyria.

Question: A 10-mm calculus in the right lower ureter associated with proximal
hydroureterone-phrosis is best treated with
A. ESWL
B. PCNL
C. Open ureterolithotomy
D. Ureteroscopic retrieval
Correct Answer: D

Question: All of the following are seen in deep vein thrombosis except
A. Pain
B. Discolouration
C. Swelling
D. Claudication
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Claudication occurs in arterial occlusion

Question: Feature of osteoahritis is -
A. Heberden node
B. Increased ESR
C. Onycholysis
D. Z deformity
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. is 'a' i.e., Heberden node Joint involvement in OA Common joints : Knee, Hip, Spine (cervical, lumbosacral), Hand (PIP, DIP, first carpometacarpal), first tarsometatarsal. Uncommon joint : Shoulder Spared : Wrist, elbow, ankle, metacarpophalangeal. In osteoahritis of hand : Distal interphalangeal joint :- Heberden's node. Proximal interphalangeal joint :- Bouchard's node

Question: In Patey's mastectomy all the following are removed except
A. Pectoralis major
B. Skin of the breast
C. Pectoralis minor
D. Ductular system of the breast
Correct Answer: A
Explanation: Ans. (a) Pectoralis major(Ref. Bailey and Love 26th edition Page 813)Structures removed in Patey's mastectomy:* Breast, nipple, areola including the skin overlying the tumor* Level 1,2,3 Lymphnodes* Fascia over Pectoralis major* Pectoralis minor muscle

Question: In which of the following condition local excision in rectal carcinoma can not be done?
A. Within 10 cm of the dentate line
B. Lesion 2.7 cm
C. Involvement of <30% bowel circumference
D. T1 and T2 cancer with lymph node involvement
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: Suggested criteria for local excision in rectal cancer: Physical examination Imaging Histology Tumor <3 cm Tumor <30% of bowel circumference Tumor within 15 cm of dentate line Tumor freely mobile Tumor limited to submucosa (T1) No lymph node involvement (N0) Well to moderately differentiated Absence of lymphovascular invasion or perineural invasion No mucinous or signet cell component

Question: Nipple retraction in Ca breast due to infiltration of
A. Suspensory ligaments
B. Lactiferous ducts
C. Lymphatics
D. Pectoralis fascia
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Answer- B. Lactiferous ductsIt is seen in breast carcinoma due to infltration of the lactiferous ducts by carcinoma.It is due to extention of the growth along the lactiferous ducts and subsequent fibrosis.Nipple retraction is circumferential in carcinoma and slit like in periductal mastitis.

Question: A 30 year old female patient complains of painless hard anterior neck mass. FNAC was inconclusive. Open thyroid biopsy was performed which revealed the  ﬁbrous nature of the mass, woody, non tender thyroid, mimicking carcinoma is  observed.  The diagnosis points towards
A. De Quervain's thyroiditis
B. Riedel's thyroiditis
C. Hashimoto’s thyroiditis
D. None of the above
Correct Answer: B

Question: Treatment of hydatid cyst
A. Excision of cyst
B. Percutaneous drainage
C. Conservative management
D. None
Correct Answer: B
Explanation: Puncture - aspiration- injection -reaspiration (PAIR) done percutaneously because it is safe, less invasive, easier to do with low morbidity and moality. Reference: SRB 5th edition page no. 604

Question: H. pylori has been implicated in all, except
A. Gastric ulcer
B. Gastric carcinoma
C. Gastric lymphoma
D. GIST
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: H pylori infection is almost always present in the setting of active chronic gastritis and is present in most patients with duodenal (80% to 95%) and gastric (60% to 90%)ulcers. Most patients with gastric cancer have current or past H. pylori infection.There is also a strong association between mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT)lymphoma and H. pylori infection.Sabiston 20e pg: 1223

Question: A 43-year-old man suddenly develops odynophagia. Which organism is most likely to be isolated on throat culture?
A. Mononucleosis
B. S. aureus
C. Normal pharyngeal flora
D. Group A streptococci
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: Odynophagia is a sensation of sharp retrosternal pain on swallowing. It is usually caused by severe erosive conditions such as Candida, herpes virus, and corrosive injury following caustic ingestion.

Question: The earliest manifestation of increased intrcranial pressure following head injury is
A. Ipsilateral pupillary dilatation
B. Contralateral pupillary dilatation
C. Altered mental status
D. Hemiparesis
Correct Answer: C
Explanation: In general, symptoms and signs that suggest a rise in ICP include altered level of consciousness, headache, vomitingwithout nausea, ocular palcies, back pain and papilledema. If papilledema is protracted, it may lead to visual disturbances, optic atrophy, and eventually blindness. The headache is classically a morning headache which may wake them from sleep. The brain is relatively poorly supplied by oxygen as a result of mild hypoventilation during the sleeping hours and also cerebral edema may worsen during the night due to the lying position. ref-Graham, D. I.; Gennarelli, T. A. (2000). "Pathology of Brain Damage After Head Injury". In Cooper, Paul Richard; Golfinos, John (eds.). Head Injury (4th ed.). McGraw-Hill. pp. 133-54

Question: A 55-year-old man with recent onset of atrial fibrillation presents with a cold, pulseless left lower extremity. He complains of left leg paresthesia and is unable to dorsiflex his toes. Following a successful popliteal embolectomy, with restoration of palpable pedal pulses, the patient is still unable to dorsi- flex his toes. The next step in management should be
A. Electromyography (EMG)
B. Measurement of anterior compartment pressure
C. Elevation of the left leg
D. Immediate fasciotomy
Correct Answer: D
Explanation: This case illustrates two (among many) conditions that lead to the anterior compartment syndrome, namely, acute arterial occlusion without collateral inflow and rapid reperfusion of ischemic muscle. Treatment for a compartment syndrome is prompt fasciotomy Assessing a compartment syndrome and proceeding with fasciotomy are generally based on clinical judgment. Inability to dorsiflex the toes is a grave sign of anterior compartment ischemia. EMG studies and compartment pressure measurements would probably be abnormal but are unnecessary in view of the known findings and would delay treatment. Mere elevation of the leg would be an ineffective means of relieving compartment pressure, although elevation should accompany fasciotomy. Application of a splint has no role in the acute management of this problem.

Question: Pyoderma-gangrenosum is most commonly associated with -
A. Ulcerative colitis
B. Crohns disease
C. Amoebic colitis
D. Ischemic colitis
Correct Answer: A

